SAM Coupé

Users` Manual
By Mel Croucher




© MILES GORDON TECHNOLOGY plc. 1989
This manual is something like the one I wanted when
I started programming. I could have read through the
Glossary and begun to understand what all the jargon
obscured. I could have let SAM lead me by the hand for
a bit of instant enjoyment. But in those days, computers
were mysterious: as big as a bus and as daft as a brush.
If you think I'm going to waste too much of the Manual's
space on simple ideas and not devote enough pages to
advanced concepts, you're probably right. Read through
it because I think that the Sam Coupé is a wonderful
machine. If only it had been around when I was you.
                  Mel Croucher, October 1989


This is Mel's manual, and as soon as you start reading,
you'll see what a great job he's done. All credit to him
and his team for making the unreadable readable - and
especially for introducing us to SAM: a special word of
praise to Robin Evans, the SAM cartoonist.
But there are other heroes too, and without them we'd
never have managed to turn our Coupe dream into
reality.
Ever since the Coupe was just a gleam in our eyes, Bob
Brenchley and John Wase have encouraged and guided
us. Simon Goodwin discovered MGT and SAM in
Cambridge, told the world, and then contributed in so
many ways. Andy Wright had faith in us in the early
days too, and has gone on to write the best Basic we've
ever seen.
Later, Bruce Everiss played a vital role in making it all
happen: marshalling industry support and raising public
awareness. Bojangeborg gave up a summer in Sweden
to write 'Flash!' Fouad Katan, Keith Turner and David
Whittaker not only got involved in developing material
but also turned out to support us at public events. Dave
Hood, who designed our original logo, now proves his
graphic skills with the demonstration software.
Thanks too to Simon White, Mike Burns and Paul Bater
for their invaluable support. Nor should we forget the
MGT team: we can't mention one of you without
mentioning all - let's just say that collectively, you're the
best in the business. And finally, thanks to our loyal
customers. We've often said that "our best ideas come
from our customers". Now we hope you'll be able to
see just how hard we've been listening to you!
         Alan Miles, Bruce Gordon and Rob Collins
THIS SAM COUPÉ MANUAL IS WRITTEN AND DESIGNED BY MEL
CROUCHER, LASER-TYPESET BY KATE CAMERON-DAUM AND
ILLUSTRATED BY ROBIN EVANS FOR YOUR ENJOYMENT.
FIRST PUBLISHED 1989, BY MILES GORDON TECHNOLOGY plc,
LAKESIDE, PHOENIX WAY, SWANSEA ENTERPRISE PARK,
SWANSEA SA7 9EH, U.K.
© MILES GORDON TECHNOLOGY plc 1989. All rights reserved.

NO PART OFTHIS MANUAL MAY BE REPRODUCED ORADAPTED BY ANY
MEANS UNLESS FORTHEPURPOSESOFREVIEWORFORTHEUSEOFTHE
OWNER OF THIS MANUAL IN ENTERING PROGRAMS INTO THEIR SAM
COUPE EVERYTHING IN THIS MANUAL IS OFFERED TO YOU IN GOOD
FAITH AND MILES GORDON plc WILL NOT BE LIABLE IN ANY EVENT, FOR
ANYLOSS HOWEVER ARISING. WE RESERVE THE RIGHT TO ALTER THE
SPECIFICATIONS OFTHE SAM COUPÉ AND TO UPDATE THIS MANUAL AS
NECESSARY




               `What’s the use of computers?
               They will never plat chess draw
               Art or make music.`
                                      (Jean Genet)

               `Play it SAM, play it!`
                              (Humphrey Bogart)
                                         CONTENTS
                                               Page
Chapter 1   SETTING UP                          1
            testing video & audio               5
            First Aid checklist                 6
Chapter 2   WHAT'S WHAT                         7
            sockets & ports                     9
            the keyboard                       12
            computer care                      15
Chapter 3   SOFTWARE                           17
            ROM and RAM                        18
            cassette recorders                 20
            RUN and SAVE                       22
            VERIFY and LOAD                    23
            INPUT                              24
            MERGE                              25
Chapter 4   SAM BASIC                          27
               Beginner's BASIC
            keywords and commands              28
            EDITing, DELETE and REM            30
            Punctuation                        31
            RUN, STOP, PAUSE                   32
            INPUT, GO TO, CONTINUE             33
            PRINT statements                   34
            IF and THEN                        36
               Everyday BASIC
            strings, variables, arrays         37
            ELSE, LOOPS and STEPs              40
            Subroutines                        43
            Calculations                       44
            Functions                          45
            beautified BASIC                   49
                Advanced SAM BASIC
            random numbers                      51
            DATA                               52
            DO, WHILE, UNTIL, IF               55
            AND, OR, NOT                       56
            defining functions                 57
            handling strings                   58
            procedures                         59
            references and labels              61
            system variables                   61
                                                         CONTENTS
                                                               Page

Chapter 5                   COLOUR & LIGHT                       63
                            the PALETTE                          64
                            the colour chart                    66
                            PEN and PAPER                        67
                            the four screen Modes               68
                            attributes                          70
Chapter 6                   TEXT & GRAPHICS                      73
                            graphic commands                     74
                            graphics scaling                     77
                            SCROLL, ROLL, WINDOW, GRAB           79
                            Animation                            82
                            the character set                    86
Chapter 7                   block graphics and UDGs              88
                            MAKING MUSIC                         93
                            BEEP                                 94
                            Shortcuts                           96
                            MIDI                                 97
Chapter 8                   SOUND EFFECTS                       99
                            ZAP, POW, ZOOM and BOOM            100
                            SOUND                              100
                            EXPANDING THE SYSTEM               103
Chapter 9
                            add-ons                            104
                            printers                            105
                            MEMORY                             109
Chapter 10                  extra memory                       110
                            machine code                       112
                            disk drives                        115
Chapter 11                  COMMUNICATIONS                      117
                            Education                           118
                            streams and channels                119
Chapter 12                  ERROR CODES                         121

GLOSSARY of SAM computing                                      131

SAM Coupé Specification and Appendix                           169

INDEX                                                           181
Chapter 1

SETTING
UP

 unpacking the computer

 setting up

 switching on

 testing – testing

 First Aid checklist




`To begin at the
beginning`
      (Dylan Thomas)




                          1
Chapter 1                                                             Setting Up

DON’T SWITCH   This User Manual is intended to help you enjoy all
ON!            the benefits of the Sam Coupé micro-computer.
               Please read this chapter BEFORE you plug it in and
               turn it on. The manual is designed to assist and
               entertain those of you who are new to computing,
               as well as inform experienced users who will also
               benefit from the specialist information.




Your SAM       The Sam Coupé is an advanced machine, offering a
Coupé          large memory, brilliant graphics and superb sound.
               It's your vehicle for creative entertainment, educa-
               tion and above all, fun! But your new computer is
               as important to Miles Gordon Technology as it is to
               you, which is why we want to hear from everyone
               who enjoys using it, and keep you up to date with
               the latest news and advances concerning SAM.

               Please fill in your Registration/Guarantee form, and
TALK TO US     we'll do the rest. If you need any extra information
               or specialist details, we have prepared a Technical
               Manual for advanced users. Write to us at the
               address below or telephone the Sam Coupé Cus-
               tomer Care Line with any enquiries, ideas or achieve-
               ments: 9 am to 7 pm Monday to Friday. MGT want
               to know what the most important component in our
               business thinks, and that means you.




               MILES GORDON TECHNOLOGY
               LAKESIDE, PHOENIX WAY
               SWANSEA ENTERPRISE PARK
               SWANSEA SA7 9EH, UK

               SAM CUSTOMER CARE LINE: tel. 0792 791100




                                                                              2
Chapter 1                                                             Setting Up

What you get is
What you see      Now that you have opened the SAM Coupé pack –
                  Age, please check that everything is present and
                  Correct, and identify the following items:




                  (1) your Sam Coupé computer.

                  (2) this User Manual.

                  (3) the Guarantee/Registration card.

                  (4) the power supply unit, with a phono socket for
                      connecting SAM to a TV set, a cable with a 6-pin
                      DIN plug that delivers power to SAM, and
                      another cable waiting for the fused plug (sup-
                      plied) that will take power from the mains.

                  (5) a connecting cable with 3.5mm jack plugs at
                      either end, to transmit and receive computer
                      data via a cassette recorder.

                  (6) the connecting cable between the TV socket
                      on the power supply unit and your own televi-
                      sion set.

                  (7) our data cassette and booklet of demonstra-
                      tion computer programs, including the spec-
                      tacular graphic art package, 'FLASH!'.




                                                                               3
Chapter 1                                                                   Setting Up

CONNECTING              The fact that you might have to fit the power supply
THE POWER               unit (4) with the supplied mains power plug is not
                        because MGT are lazy, but because cabling require-
CABLES
                        ments and mains socket outlets vary in different
                        regions and countries. For UK users, you'll proba-
                        bly have wall socket outlets that take 3-pin 240v
                        fused mains plugs, so connect the power plug in the
                        normal way, with the BROWN cable to the live
                        terminal, and BLUE to neutral. The plug should
                        have a 3 amp fuse.

                        Don't plug into the mains yet, and make sure the
   "It ain 't what      ON/OFF button at the back of the computer is in the
    you do, it's the    OFF position. As you look at the back, it's the third
   way that you         item from the right on the control panel, and it sticks
   do it."              OUT for OFF, and stays IN for ON. Now identify the
                        cable from the power supply unit with the 6-pin
         (Bananarama)
                        DIN plug on the end, and connect it to the power
                        socket at the back of your Sam Coupé. As you look
                        at the back panel there's only one socket that can
                        take a 6-pin DIN, and it's the one on the extreme
                        right hand side.

                        Next, identify the TV cable (6) and plug the correct
CONNECTING
                        phono plug into the aerial socket of your television
TO AN                   set, with the other end plugged into the TV phono
ORDINARY                socket on the power supply unit. Now you can plug
COLOUR TV               into the mains, switch on the TV set and push SAM'S
SET                     power switch" ON, which is the 'IN' position.

                        The computer sends out signals that can be picked
Turn on
                        up by Channel 36 of a domestic TV set. If you are
Tune in                 using specialist monitors, or stereo SCART-type
                         sockets, connections are explained in Chapter 2
                         and Chapter 9. This Chapter applies to ordinary
                         UHF televisions only. Fine-tune your set around
                         Channel 36 until you see a test pattern with the
                         following message appearing on the screen:




                                                                                     4
Chapter 1                                                          Setting Up
                                      MILES GORDON TECHNOLOGY plc
                                           © 1989 Sam Coupé 256K
`Welcome`               This is the 'welcome' screen that appears every time
screen                  the computer is switched on or restarted from scratch,
                        and the number at the end reports how much
                        'memory' your Sam Coupé has on board. If it has
                        been fitted with extra memory, the end number will
                        read 512K.

                        You can now test out SAM for colour and sound, to
                        make sure that everything is in order. In this
                        Manual, the symbol is used every time we want
                        you to type something on the computer keyboard,
                        so without any explanations, try typing this:

                                BORDER 1

Testing                 You can type in capital letters or lower case letters,
Testing                 it doesn't make any difference. Now locate the large
                        [RETURN] key near the centre-right of the key-
                        board, and press that. The BORDER around the TV
                        screen picture should have changed to blue, with a
                         message ø OK, ø:1 in the bottom left corner.
                        Adjust the tuning if it's still a little bit out, then go for
                         a red border, by typing:

                                BORDER 2

                        followed by a press of the [RETURN] key.
   “I hate television
   as much as           Make sure that the TV volume control is turned up
                        a little, and type in the following instruction:
   peanuts. But I
   can’t stop eating            BEEP 1,1
   peanuts!”
(Orson Welles)          followed by [RETURN]. A short BEEP of sound
                        should have squirted out of the TV speaker.

                        Congratulations! If the BORDER has changed colour
                        and the speaker is BEEPing, you've already started
                        programming your new computer. Now read
                        through the next couple of Chapters and find out
                        what's going on.




                                                                                        5
Chapter 1                                                                      Setting Up

FIRST AID                There is probably a simple explanation for any
                         problems experienced in setting up your computer.
CHECKLIST                Identify what's wrong then go through this First Aid
for domestic             Checklist in order.

TV sets                  PROBLEM                           FIRST AID
                         the TV screen is                 Check computer ON-OFF
                         blank                            switch is in ON position.
                                                          Check TV is switched on.
                                                          Check power supply plugs
                                                          for loose or bad connections.
                                                          Check fuse in power plug
                                                          and any fused socket outlet.

                         the TV screen shows              Check computer is switched
                         random white dots, or            on.
                         is broadcasting quiz             Check TV is tuned to
                         shows!                           Channel 36.
                                                          Check cable between
                                                          computer and TV is properly
                                                          connected.

                         the colour TV picture            Check TV channel for fine
                         is washed out or                 tuning.
                         black and white only             Check TV colour adjustment.
                                                          Check for loose cable
                                                          connection between
                                                          computer and TV.

    “Why pay money       the TV picture is                Check volume control on TV.
     to see bad films?   good, but there is no            Check TV channel for fine
     Stay home and       sound                            tuning.
     See bad televi-
                         there are strange                 Press any key.
     Sion for notherg”   geometric patterns or             Press the BREAK button,
         (Sam Goldwyn)   random characters on              which is at the far left as you
                         the screen, or the                look at the back of the
                         screen turns black,               computer.
                                                           Press the RESET button,
                                                           which is on the left of the
                                                           long connector socket as you
                                                           look at the back of the
                                                           computer.
                         If all else fails, 'phone the Sam Coupé Customer Care line.




                                                                                             6
Chapter 2

WHAT`S
WHAT

 what the sockets, pots and
 buttons do
 a trip round the keyboard
 caring for your computer
 and its software




`This morning
I abused my
Electric toaster.
Tonight the
elevator held
me hostage in
revenge.`
    (Woody Allen)


                              7
Chapter 2        What’s What




     BACK VIEW


                           8
Chapter 2                                                  What’s What

SOCKETS,    If you imagine your computer to be like an intelli-
PORTS AND   gent Mother-Ship, then all sorts of service modules
            and communications devices can dock with it,
BUTTONS
            making the machine even more useful.



            The Sam Coupé has a large built-in memory and can
THE FRONT   call up information stored on magnetic tapes and
            disks. Memory and disks are dealt with in Chapter
OF THE
            10. MGT produce special slim-line DISK DRIVES
MACHINE     that fit right inside your computer via the twin dock-
            ing slots at the front of the machine. The slots are
            exposed by unclipping their protective covers, with
            access for DISK DRIVE 1 on the left and DISK DRIVE
            2 on the right.



THE BACK    To connect your computer to the outside world, a
OF THE      bank of special sockets, ports and buttons is pro-
MACHINE     vided at the back of the machine. They are num-
            bered on the diagram as follows:

            (1) BREAK BUTTON
            When pressed, this button will halt whatever is
            going on in a computer program. Programmers can
            choose to use it as an ESCAPE, BREAK or CRASH
            button.

            (2) MIDI OUT
            Musical Instrument Digital Interface Output, for
            sending musical information. The standard 7-pin
            DIN connector can also be used to talk to other
            computers in a NETWORK.

            (3) MIDI IN
            Musical Instrument Digital Interface Input, or MIDI
            IN for short, can receive pulses of information from
            drum machines, synthesisers and other instruments
            as explained in Chapter 7. This interface socket




                                                                     9
Chapter 2                                                  What’s What

            takes a standard 7-pin DIN connector, not supplied,
            and can also be used to listen to other computers as
            part of a NETWORK.

            (4) JOYSTICK PORT
            Socket for a standard 9-pin 'Atari'-type joystick
            plug. The joystick is used to control actions in
            game-playing. A second joystick can be connected
            for two-player options by using a special MGT dual
            joystick adaptor.

            (5) MOUSE INTERFACE
            Socket for an 8-pin DIN 'mouse' connector. The
            mouse is used to move a pointer around the screen
            and select on-screen options, and is available from
            MGT.

            (6) RESET BUTTON
            When pressed, this button resets the machine. Please
            see Glossary for details.

            (7) EXPANSION CONNECTOR
            This interface is a standard 64-pin Euroconnector.
            Expanding your computer system is explained in
            Chapter 9.

            (8) CASSETTE JACK
            A standard 3.5mm mono jack socket for connection
            to a cassette recorder. When taking information IN
            it should be connected to the EAR socket of the
            recorder. When giving information OUT it should
            be connected to the MIC socket. If your tape
             recorder allows it, EAR and MIC may be connected
             together




                                                                    10
Chapter 2                                                     What’s What

            (9) LIGHT PEN & STEREO SOUND
            This standard 5-pin DIN connector acts as an input
            for a light pen or light gun and also functions as a
            stereo sound output when connected to the AUX
            input of a sound system.

            (10) ON-OFF BUTTON
            Even though power is supplied to the computer all
            the time its power supply is plugged in and switched
            on at the mains, this button interrupts the power
            when it is pushed to the OUT position for OFF.
            Power is allowed through to the machine when the
            button is pushed IN for ON.

            (11) SCART SOCKET
            A special 21-pin socket capable of handling all
            video and stereo audio outputs. See Chapter 9,
            'Expanding the System'.

            (12) POWER INPUT
            A dual-purpose 6-pin DIN connector which accepts
            15 volts DC from the Power Supply Unit plug. It also
            carries TV video signals and mono sound back to
            the socket located in the power supply unit. See
            Chapter 1,'Setting Up'.

            Before you read any further, make sure that you
            know exactly what each of the back panel sockets
            and buttons is for.




                                                                       11
Chapter 2               What’s What




“Life is like a tin
of sardines
We’re all looking
For the key.”
       (Alan Bennett)




                                 12
Chapter 2                                                         What’s What

THE TOP OF     Rest your hands over the top of the computer. It
THE MACHINE    slopes like the top of a racing car, and that's one
               reason we christened it the Coupe. MGT have
               designed it to be practical as well as attractive, and
               if you have ever used an old-fashioned computer
               you will soon discover how much more comfort-
               able your sloping keyboard feels. It's deliberately
               set back from the front edge, with a special wrist
               support panel for easy typing.


               The whole range of Sam Coupé keys is used to
               communicate with the machine, but they are much
               better than those of an ordinary typewriter key-
               board, because you can instruct most keys to do all
               sorts of things.


               Let's suppose you are a beginner, and need to know
A trip round   what the keys do. The next section of this Chapter
The keyboard   is a guided tour around the keyboard, so refer to the
               illustration on the opposite page which shows the
               Sam Coupé keyboard as it appears on your com-
               puter, with certain groups of keys outlined with
               thick border lines.


               Throughout this Manual we refer to individual keys
               that must be pressed to achieve results by putting
               them inside square brackets, such as [A]. When two
               keys must be pressed at the same time, we write that
               as [SHIFT] [A], for example.


               The illustration shows a large group of keys inside
Characters     a thick black line, and these are all the keys you
And [SPAC]s    would expect to find on a typewriter. The top row
               includes numbers and symbols, the middle three
               rows represent all the letters of the alphabet and
               some more symbols, and the bottom row features a
               long [SPACE] bar for typing in blank spaces.




                                                                           13
Chapter 2                                                    What’s What



[SHIFT]     There is a long [SHIFT] key at either side of the
            lower row of letter keys, and as you would expect,
            when this is pressed at the same time as a letter key
            it SHIFTS from lower case to upper case and makes
            a capital letter appear. So that pressing [A] on its
            own PRINTS the character 'a' on your TV screen,
            whereas pressing [SHIFT] [A] together displays the
            character 'A'. [SHIFT] also changes what appears
            when you use it with all the number and most of the
            symbol keys.
[CAPS]      You can lock everything into capitals by pressing
            the [CAPS] key, on the left hand side of the key-
            board. This state is unlocked simply by pressing
            [CAPS] again, to go back to normal upper and lower
            case.

            Because you can't use an eraser or correcting fluid
            on a TV screen without making a filthy mess, we
[DELETE]    have provided a [DELETE] key near the right hand
            side of the top row. This will deal with any mistakes
            that get typed in accidentally. Press [DELETE]
            once, and the last character you typed gets rubbed
            out. If you hold down the [DELETE] key, characters
            continue to be erased very quickly, from right to left
            on your TV screen. [SHIFT] [DELETE] erases to the
            right.

            The remaining keys have more specialised func-
            tions, but don't worry what they do yet, just locate
            them on the keyboard.

            [RETURN] is the large corner-shaped key near the
            centre right on the keyboard. [ESC] is an ESCape
            key, at the extreme top left. Both of these keys are
            explained in the next Chapter.

            The whole group of keys on the far right of the
            keyboard is explained in Chapter 4. It includes ten




                                                                      14
Chapter 2                                                       What’s What


             special function keys numbered [FO] to [F9], a
             decimal point key and four keys at the bottom with
             directional arrow heads on them, known as cursor
             keys. You will also learn about the [EDIT] key on
             the bottom line.

             Typing in text and graphics is covered in Chapter
             6, where the remaining keys are explained: [TAB]
             (near the top left hand corner), [INV] (which is
             above the [EDIT] key), and finally, the two
             [SYMBOL] keys and [CNTRL] key, in the bottom
             row.

CARING FOR   You can't hurt your SAM Coup6 by bad program-
YOUR SAM     ming or pressing the wrong key, but don't try to
             stick silly things in its sockets or ports, or mess about
COUPÉ        with its insides. You wouldn't like that and neither
             will your computer. The Sam Coupé prefers similar
             working conditions to you, so keep it clear of
             freezing cold and sweltering heat as well as harmful
             sunbathing, drizzle and thunderstorms.

             Let fresh air circulate beneath and around all sides
             when in use, and your computer won't rise above
             blood temperature. The small amount of heat
             generated while SAM is switched on is quite normal.

             Using the wrong power supply is dangerous, and
             beating up your machine or pouring drinks into it
             are not good ideas. Use a soft cloth to clean the case,
             but please avoid abrasive pads, powders and sol-
             vents like alcohol or benzine.

             Programs are stored on disks and cassettes as
CARING FOR   magnetic recordings, so they may get damaged or
             made totally useless if they get exposed to magnets
DISKS AND    or radiation. Keep all disks and cassettes away from
CASSETTES    loudspeakers, and don't leave them on top of tele-
             vision sets or under telephones. If you are on the




                                                                         15
Chapter 2                                                              What’s What


PROTECT AND             move and carrying software, watch out for under-
SURVIVE                 floor magnets in trains and baggage x-rays at air-
                        ports.

                        Keep computer data out of direct sunlight and away
                        from heaters, dust and high humidity. The back
                        window of a car is a disaster zone!

                        Don't stand drinks next to software, they don't mix,
                        and don't poke anything inside disk or cassette
                        cases.

                        If you want to keep an important piece of software,
                        then knock out the lug at the back of your cassette
                        or push in the special tab on a 3.5 inch disk after
                        you've SAVEd the data, to prevent accidental era-
                        sure. Always make back-up copies of important
                        software as explained in the next chapter.

                        Everyone should know by now that television
                        screens can be tricky, but you can stay healthy and
                        happy if you follow some simple advice. Because
`Out! Out!              you may find it hard to drag yourself away from your
                        Sam Coupé, sit as far away from the screen as you
Dame Spot!`
                        can and take a short break every couple of hours.
       (Lady Macbeth)   Give the screen a wipe with a soft cloth to remove
                        electrostatic dust every time you use it, and your
                        skin will thank you for not touching the screen and
                        fingering your face!

                        Television screens can burn out if the same image is
                        displayed for too long, so a special safety feature
CARING FOR              will black out your screen if you don't press a key
YOUR TV SET             for about 22 minutes. Simply press any key to get
                        your last image back. This is NOT a fault, it is a
                        protection routine for your screen.




                                                                                16
Chapter 3

SOFTWARE

 what software does and
 how it gets done

 writing a program

 SAVEing

 VERIFYing

 LOADing

 MERGEing




    `When I was a
    kid I couldn’t
    even spell
    PROGRAMMER,
    But now I are
    One`

    (graffiti, Sussex
          University)




                          17
Chapter 3                                                                   Software

ROM                  The computer comes equipped with two types of
                     brain. In the first type, information that has been
                     taught in the Sam Coupé factory lies buried in
                     special memory cells. You can read what's in these
                     cells but you can't change the contents, so they are
                     known as READ ONLY MEMORY, or ROM for
                     short. The computer remembers what is in them
                     even when switched off.

                     The second type of brain contains empty memory
RAM
                     cells that are waiting to learn something new. You
                     can plant all sorts of fresh ideas here and gain access
                     to them as you choose, which is why they are called
                     the RANDOM ACCESS MEMORY, or RAM for short.
“Brain; noun:        This type of memory gets erased every time the
an apparatus         machine is switched off. So we need a method of
                     teaching new ideas to the brain quickly and accu-
with which we
                     rately, by LOADing computer programs already
think we think”      stored up somewhere else.
  (Ambrose Bierce)
                     When you were setting up, you instructed your
                     machine to change the BORDER colours of the
                     screen and to BEEP a sound so that you could test
                     the system. It only took a few seconds, so it
                     wouldn't matter much if you had to do it again next
                     time you powered up the computer. But what if you
                     had spent all day slaving over a complicated piece
                     of programming, only to have it forgotten when you
                     pulled the plug?

                     Fortunately you can SAVE programs onto cassettes
                     or disks for use later.

                     If you are only interested in using your Sam Coupé
Commercially         to play computer games written by other people,
available            you're in luck! There are thousands to choose from'
software             Computer games, useful educational programs and
                     special utilities that have been produced by private




                                                                                  18
Chapter 3                                                              Software


             individuals and companies can be purchased for
             your own use, and these packages come in the form
             of pre-recorded cassettes and disks. They are known
             as software. Apart from software written specially
             for the Sam Coupé, you are able to use a whole
             range of games and programs that have already
             been written for another less sophisticated com-
             puter called the Spectrum. The Sam Coupé will
             automatically examine this software using a special
             program that you will find on your 'FLASH' demon-
             stration cassette and if all is well, convert it into a
             form that will RUN for your enjoyment. To be
             honest, dedicated games players can stop reading
             this Manual now, but you'll be missing out on
             creativity and home-grown fun.

             All you have to do is follow the LOADing instruc-
             tions that come with the games. If in doubt, follow
             the LOADing instructions in the next section of this
             chapter.


             If you want to use the computer for creating and
Home-grown   keeping your own ideas, you will need to use a few
software     simple techniques for SAVEing them somewhere
             safe and LOADing them back into your machine
             next time you need them.

             SAVE
             is the command used to tell the computer to get
             ready to record your lists of instructions onto tape or
             disk.

             VERIFY
             is used to ask the computer to check that whatever
             has just been SAVEd is all present and correct, and
             that whatever is now stored onto tape or disk is
             exactly the same as what the computer still has in its
             memory




                                                                             19
Chapter 3                                                               Software



             LOAD
             tells the computer to empty its memory and get
             ready to receive new information which has already
             been stored on cassette tape or disk.

             MERGE
             commands the computer to LOAD in new informa-
             tion, but to keep any existing information in its
             memory, provided that it does not conflict with
             what's being MERGEd.

             If you are lucky enough to have an MGT Coupe disk
STORING      drive, follow the instructions and fit it in Drive 1 via
INFORMA-     the special slot in the front of your computer. All the
TION         instructions you need are in the Disk Drive Manual,
             and in Chapter 10 of this Manual. The following
             information is for cassette users.

             Connect up a cassette tape recorder as detailed in
Setting up   Chapter 2, ready to send information OUT from the
A cassette   3.5mm jack socket to the cassette's MIC socket. It is
Recorder     best to set any TONE controls to neutral, and you
             will have to use trial and error to discover the best
             VOLUME level for RECORDing and PLAYing back
             information. If your tape recorder has a 'VU-meter'
             that displays the level of recorded sound with a dial,
             a bar of light or a digital meter in decibels, the signal
             should not go much higher than +ldB. Make sure
             that the cassette tape is wound on past any non-
             magnetic leader tape, and that the knock-out lug is
             in place at the back of the cassette. Please use a new
             blank cassette, and ON NO ACCOUNT use the
             'FLASH' demonstration cassette for recording over!

Your first   Now you are ready to test the system by writing a
program      simple 'program'. A program is the word used for a
             collection of commands that you use to tell the SAM




                                                                              20
Chapter 3                                                                      Software
                      Coupe what to do. Don't forget how to use the
                      [SHIFT] key, and where the [DELETE] key is, in
                      case you make any mistakes.

                      Computers aren't very imaginative unless you en-
                      courage them, and they will obey all your com-
                      mands one after the other, starting at the beginning
                      right through to the end.

                      This works just fine until you decide to make changes
Line Numbers
                      in your programming and need to find the relevant
                      part of your list of commands. To keep things in a
“Begin at the         neat and simple order, computer programs are
beginning`, the       broken up into lines, just like the lines in a printed
                      book of instructions. Each line is given its own
King said,            reference number at the beginning, so that the
Gravely to Alice      computer knows exactly which part of its program
`and go on till       you are talking about, and we usually number lines
                      in 'tens' to make it easier to add extra lines between
you come to the       the original line numbers.
end;then stop.`
    (Lewis Carroll)   Because you want the computer to obey each line
[RETURN]              of program, you will want to send your typed
                      instructions to be stored in its memory, and this is
                      where the corner-shaped [RETURN] key comes
                      into play. [RETURN] has several uses, and the First
                      one is to achieve just this.

                      Remember, the [key] symbol is used to mean 'type
                      in whatever follows this', so have a go at typing the
                      following program exactly as it appears below,
                      press [RETURN] at the end of each line, and don't
                      worry how it all works for the time being. You type
                      a question mark by pressing [SYMB] [X] together.
                                  10 BORDER 3 [RETURN]
                                  20 PRINT "I HAVE AMNESIA" [RETURN]
                                  30 BEEP 3,0 [RETURN]
                                  40 BORDER 1 [RETURN]
                                  50 PRINT "What is my name?"




                                                                                     21
Chapter 3                                                            Software
                                [RETURN]

            You will see your lines of program appearing at the
            bottom of the screen as you type them in, and as
            soon as they are committed to the computer's
            memory by pressing [RETURN], they are listed at
            the top of the screen as part of the computer pro-
            gram, with a little arrow character > pointing out
            which line of program you have been concerned
            with. This indicator is called a cursor, and more
            will be explained about its uses later on.

            Let's make the computer work by RUNning your
RUNing a    program, and type in:
Program
                                RUN [RETURN]

            This makes the Sam Coupé BEEP a note, change
            the colour of the screen BORDER, and PRINT up
            your test successfully, ending with a little OK mes-
            sage at the bottom of the screen, to show at which
            line the program stopped. The program can RUN as
            many times as you like while the computer is
            switched on, by typing in RUN [RETURN] again,
            and your listing of lines can be examined by press-
            ing [RETURN] on its own.

            You can go away and make a cup of tea in a minute,
SAVE        but before you switch off the computer you'll want
            to SAVE your 'amnesia' program so that you can
            LOAD it in after the kettle has boiled. For SAVEing
            to cassette, just type in:

                              SAVE "amnesia" [RETURN]

            and a message appears on screen, prompting you to
            start off the recording process on your tape recorder,
            with the cable connected to its MIC socket for
            taking information IN, and then press a key on the
            keyboard. Any key will do. The screen's centre
            usually goes blank while waiting for the SAVEing
            process to begin, and the border will change colour.




                                                                           22
Chapter 3                                                            Software
            Narrow coloured bars indicate that your program is
            being transferred to tape. After a short while the
            reassuring OK message appears, and you can stop
            the cassette recording.

            To make doubly sure that what's on tape is the same
VERIFY      as what's in the computer's memory, wind back
            your cassette and reconnect the cassette cable to the
            EAR socket, for sending signals OUT to the SAM
            Coupe. Now type in the checking command for
            your program:

                            VERIFY "amnesia" [RETURN]

            and play back your SAVEd program. If all goes well,
            more border patterns will appear as well as a
            recognition message at the top of the screen,
            program:amnesia, followed by the OK confirma-
            tion.

            When the program is safely stored, and you've
            found the confidence to switch off your computer
            to wipe out its memory, and the kettle has boiled,
            you can switch back on and LOAD the SAVEd
            information. Check that the cassette is wound back
            and ready to send information OUT via its EAR
            socket and give the command:

                         LOAD "amnesia" [RETURN]

            As you may have guessed, what you see on screen
            is the same as when you used VERIFY, with your
            program safely stored on tape, ready for use when-
            ever you need to use it or change it.

            If it doesn't work first time off cassette, check that
            ' the cables are connected correctly, and then wind
            ; back and adjust the volume until SAM is happy.
Error       The Sam Coupé will let you know if it's having any
Messages    problems in SAVEing and LOADing your informa-
            tion, by displaying the message "Loading error"




                                                                           23
Chapter 3                                                            Software
            on screen. And if you try to SAVE information to a
            device which doesn't exist, like a disk drive or
            another computer, the polite message "Invalid
            device" will appear.

            If you don't specify a program name and just type:
Program
Names                       LOAD""

            the computer will LOAD the first program that it
            finds. The reason for identifying individual pro-
            grams with their own name is to make it easy for the
            computer to locate a particular set of instructions
            from a whole series of programs that maybe stored
            on the same tape. You can now write another
            program and SAVE it onto cassette, leaving a gap of
            blank tape after your "amnesia" program. First
            type in:
                          50 PRINT "please tell me your name"
                              [RETURN]
                           60 INPUT n$ [RETURN]
                           70 BORDER 6 [RETURN]
                           80 BEEP 3,12 [RETURN]
                           90 PRINT "I remember now! Hello "
                               ; n$ [RETURN]
                               RUN

INPUT       When you type in RUN this time, you will be able to
            talk to your Sam Coupé for the first time! This is
            because you have used a very special instruction in
            the program. INPUT tells the machine to wait until
            you type something in before responding. So when
            the screen asks you to tell it your name, it waits for
            your INPUT before recognising you. Type in your
            name and see how SAM recognises it. You don't
            have to use your real name, you can INPUT who-
            ever or whatever you feel like.




                                                                           24
Chapter 3                                                            Software


            You can call this or any other program anything you
            want, using a "name" up to 10 characters long.
            Identify the program you have just written by using
            your own name and SAVE it as before with:

                    SAVE "my name" [RETURN]

            Now wind back the cassette to the beginning and try
            LOADing "my name". The Sam Coupé will recog-
            nise the first program on the cassette but will ignore
            it, because it was called "amnesia", and continue
            searching until it finds the correct program title.

MERGE       Switch off the computer, finish your tea, switch it
            back on and rewind the cassette. LOAD "amnesia"
             again and press [RETURN] to display the program.
             Now you are going to try something smart, by
             joining your two programs together and making
             them MERGE. Type in the instruction MERGE "my
             name" [RETURN], and send the program into the
             Sam Coupé's memory in exactly the same way as a
             normal LOADing procedure. Now examine your
             listing.

            You will notice that line 50 of "amnesia" has been
            replaced by line 50 of "my name", and your origi-
            nal program is now nine lines long. RUN it, and
            enjoy your first home-grown computer game. It
            may be primitive, but it's not a bad start.
summary
            What you have just done is to lake your first steps in
            a computer 'language' called BASIC, and the next
            Chapter is devoted to explaining how BASIC works.

            Before you plough into it, here's a summary of the
            four important instructions you have been using.

            SAVE "name" christens a program and commands
            the computer to send a copy of that program from
             its memory to be recorded.




                                                                           25
Chapter 3                                                         Software
            LOAD "" loads the first program recognised by the
            computer, wiping out the old memory.

            LOAD "name" loads the program specified by its
            name, ignoring any other program that may be on
            the tape.

            VERIFY "name" checks that the information just
            SAVEd is exactly the same as the information in the
            computer's memory with the same name.

            MERGE "name" adds new information from the
            named program to information already in the
            computer's memory, overwriting any existing pro-
            gram lines that conflict with the new program.

            CUP OF TEA is a whole lot more hit-and-miss than
            any other procedure in this chapter.

            Finally, if you ever get into difficulties while a
[ESC]       program is RUNning, you can [ESC]ape from trouble
            by holding down the key at the top left corner of the
            keyboard. This will stop the machine RUNning,
            and then BREAK into its memory. After [ESC]aping,
            simply press the [RETURN] key to display the
            program listing.




                                                                        26
Chapter 4
SAM Basic

 Beginner's BASIC
    keywords
    REMinders, starting and stopping
    PRINT statements
    making decisions, IF and THEN

 Everyday BASIC
    strings, variables and arrays
    ELSE, LOOPing, FOR-NEXT, STEP
    subroutines
    calculations
    functions
    beautified BASIC

 Advanced SAM BASIC
    random numbers
    DATA, READ, RESTORE, DIM
    DO, WHILE, UNTIL
    AND, OR, NOT
    DEF FN
    string conversions
    PROCedures, REFs and LABELs
    system variables




                                       27
Chapter 4                                                 BEGINNER`S BASIC
                             This is the Chapter that outlines how the SAM
                             Coupe's own programming language works. The
                             enhanced BASIC has been specially designed by
                             Dr. Andy Wright, and anyone used to primitive
                             BASIC is in for a pleasant surprise. There isn't
                             enough room in this manual to explore all of its
                             possibilities, but the Glossary section does give
                             every command and function available to you, and
                             advanced users can dip in and out of this Chapter.
                             Games players might want to stop reading here,
                             because this Chapter is for anyone who wants to
                             experiment and create programs. It's in three sec-
                             tions: Beginner's BASIC, Everyday BASIC and Ad-
                             vanced BASIC, so if you're a beginner, here goes!

                             BEGINNER'S BASIC
“Let all things be
                             The Sam Coupé will obey your instructions (called
done decently                commands) exactly, so you have to type them in
and in order.”               very precisely.
       (Corinthians 14:40)
                             The commands that you give your computer make
                             use of some special words, and throughout this
                             Manual they are printed in bold capital letters. We
                             call them 'keywords' and you normally type them in
                             full. There is a special way of programming single
Keywords                     keys to generate complete keywords, which is dealt
                             with later in this Chapter. Your Sam Coupé auto-
                             matically recognises every keyword that it comes
                             across and converts it to capital letters in your pro-
                             gram listing, but you must be careful not to tack
                             extra letters on if you don't mean them to be there.
                             For instance, if you type in

                                          10 print x [RETURN]

                             this will become PRINT x in your listing. But if you
                             forget to leave a space and type




                                                                                      28
Chapter 4                                  BEGINNER`S BASIC
                            10 printx [RETURN]

            the computer will assume that you have given it the
            name of a special procedure. This only happens
            with letters, so you can get away with typing things
            like

                            20 print1 [RETURN]

            which automatically becomes PRINT 1 in the pro-
            gram.

            Commands can be given directly to your computer
Giving      for instant action: all you have to do is type one in
commands    and then press the [RETURN] key. They can also be
            used within program lines to work with other in-
            structions later on. Whenever [RETURN] is used
            after you have written a line of program, that line
            becomes part of the 'listing'. From now on we'll
            assume you know that, and stop printing [RETURN]
            at the end of every line in our examples.

            As lines of program are being written, they appear
            as a 'listing' in the top section of your screen if all is
            well, but any mistake in 'syntax' (the grammar of
            SAM BASIC) gets pointed out by a question mark,
            asking you to correct it before it can become part of
            the program. The bottom two lines of the screen are
            reserved for special reports that help you spot
            mistakes, and your computer will display all sorts of
            messages to pin down what the problem is and
            where it's hiding. These messages are called 'error
Spotting    codes' and they are all explained in Chapter 12. You
mistakes    may well need this sort of help, because each line of
            your program can be as long or short as you like. It
            can contain up to 127 individual 'statements', and
            each statement can consist of a command like
            PRINT, followed by something else. You can have
            up to 65279 lines in any one program, so the error
            messages can save hours of searching for mistakes.




                                                                         29
Chapter 4                                     BEGINNER`S BASIC

The [EDIT] key   When writing your own computer programs, the
and Cursors      most useful key on your keyboard is the [EDIT] key.
                 If you press it, you jump into the part of your
                 program that the computer is thinking about, marked
                 by a special symbol on your screen that looks like an
                 arrow head >. This marker symbol is known as a
                 cursor, and it appears in front of the line number to
                 be EDITed. If you already know which line number
                 you want to EDIT, then all you have to do is type in
                 that number and press the [EDIT] key, and watch it
                 appear. You can then move around your EDIT line,
                 up and down, right or left, by holding down any of
                 the four cursor keys located at the bottom right
                 corner of your keyboard. They are clearly marked
                 with arrow-heads to show which direction they
                 control.

                 You will notice that the Sam Coupé uses two other
                 cursors on screen. An inverse * points out where
                 you are EDITing when the keyboard is in its normal
                 state, but when [CAPS] lock has been engaged,
                 upper case is indicated by an inverse +.

                 To change you program, rub out your old instruc-
DELETE
                 tions before typing in new ones by using the [DE-
                 LETE] key near the top right of the keyboard.
                 Remember [DELETE] on its own rubs out charac-
                 ters to the left one at a time, and if you press
                 [DELETE] and [SHIFT] together, characters on the
                 right get erased.

                 Delete n TO m

                 Apart from having its own key, DELETE is also a
                 keyword that can be typed in to erase whole blocks
                 of program lines. If the first line number to be
                 DELETEd n is left out, everything from line 1 is
                 deleted up to line m. If m is omitted, the last line of
                 the program is assumed. A single line can be




                                                                           30
Chapter 4                                   BEGINNER`S BASIC

              DELETEd by making n and m the same number.
              Neither n nor m actually has to exist, and any lines
              contained in their slice of the program will be
              deleted.

              An alternative way of deleting a line you don't like
              is to type in its number followed by nothing at all,
              and press [RETURN]. LOAD up "amnesia" now,
              and experiment with the [EDIT], [DELETE], [CAPS]
              and cursor keys.


              You can include short memos in SAM BASIC which
              will help to REMind you what a particular section of
REMinders     your program is for. These statements or special
              comments are stuck in to jog human memories, and
              not for the computer to worry about, and they are
              called REM statements. It's good practice to leave
              yourself a note or a heading before each new
              section of your program, so just pop in a REM after
              a line number like this:

                           10 REM amnesia

              and you can call it up or refer to it later on.

              When you want to use a number of different com-
Program       mands in a single line, they must be separated to
punctuation   allow the computer to clearly understand them.
              This is done by using colons, like this:

                           10 PAPER 6; PEN 2: PRINT "red on
Colons                      yellow"

              If you want to include several similar items in a line,
Commas        like numbers to be examined or calculations to be
              made, they must be separated using commas. E.g.

                          10 READ x,y,z
                           20 PRINT x,y,z
                          30 DATA 1,2,3,4,5




                                                                        31
Chapter 4                                  BEGINNER`S BASIC


               You are going to write a computer game in a while,
               but instead of just copying some lines from this
               Manual, there are a few BASIC concepts you need
               to know first.

Starting and   There are several ways to manage the progress of
Stopping       your programs as you create them, but the first step
               is to get them going.

               RUN
RUNing
               followed by [RETURN] of course, is all that needs to
               be typed to command the program to RUN from the
               start.

               RUN n
               instructs the program to get going from the particu-
               lar line number that you choose.

               STOP
               is a command that does exactly what it says. It
STOPing        STOPS the program at any predefined point.

               PAUSE
               allows you to make part of a program take an exact
PAUSEing
               amount of time. If you type in PAUSE by itself, or
               PAUSE 0, then your program will PAUSE for ever
               and a day until a key is pressed. For shorter timings,
               just type in PAUSE followed by a number. This will
               stop the program and freeze whatever is on the
               screen for as many 'frames' as you want, or until a
               key is pressed. Your screen displays 50 frames
               every second, so we can use numbers counted in
               frames to give a very accurate freeze-frame timing.
               For example:

                           100 PAUSE 10

               will freeze an image for one-fifth of a second.




                                                                        32
Chapter 4                                  BEGINNER`S BASIC
               INPUT
Waiting for    tells the computer to halt everything until some-
               thing is typed in. We will be using STOP, INPUT
INPUT
               and the next command GO TO, to write a guessing
               game at the end of this 'Beginner's BASIC' section.

               GOTO
Jumping with   is recognised as one keyword in BASIC, even though
GO TO          it is two words in English and may be typed 'go to'
               or 'goto'. It is used to command the computer to im-
               mediately GO TO a particular line of program, and
               can also be used to give the same instruction when
               a particular condition has been met. Try this ex-
               ample:

                           10 REM greetings
                           20 PRINT "happy birthday to you"
                           30 PAUSE 50
                           40 GO TO 20

               When you run this, greetings are printed all the way
[ESC]aping     down the screen every second. But before the
               program fills up the screen, press the [ESC]ape key
               to halt the process.

               CONTINUE
CONTINUEing    Once a program has ground to a halt because of an
               error or a deliberate [ESC]ape break-in, it can be
               kick-started by typing in the keyword CONTINUE.
               Try using it now, and allow the greetings to CON-
               TINUE until the screen is full, and asks you if you
               want to scroll?

               scroll?
               appears when the computer discovers that the screen
               is full of characters, and wonders if you want to see
               more by scrolling up the text. It's not a command,
               which is why it is displayed in lower-case letters.
               Simply press [RETURN] to scroll up the screen.




                                                                       33
Chapter 4                                    BEGINNER`S BASIC

Clear          CLS
Screen         stands for 'Clear Screen', and instantly erases all text
               and graphics that are currently displayed on your
               television screen.

a NEW start    NEW
               is a very powerful command which is the equivalent
               of giving the Sam Coupé a brain transplant, so think
               carefully before using it. NEW wipes out the entire
               computer program with all of its variables and the
               only thing left is a blank screen. It has the same
               effect as pressing the [RESET] button on the back
               panel of the computer, causing all your current
               work to be flushed to oblivion!

               PRINT
               PRINT statements are used to display characters on
               screen. There are some simple rules of punctuation
               to learn, and the first of these is the use of quotation
               marks (" "). If there is anything in the Sam Coupé's
               memory now, get rid of it by typing NEW, followed
               by [RETURN]. Now carefully type in the following
               PRINT statement:
PRINT
                           10 PRINT "G'day: how are you, SAM?"
statements
               Now press [RETURN] and RUN it. You will see that
               what is contained inside the quotes appears exactly
               as you typed it, including the apostrophe, colon,
               comma and spaces.

               However, it is very important to understand that
PRINT          punctuation used OUTSIDE of quotes in a PRINT
statement      statement can act as special instructions.
punctuation
               Commas (,) instruct the computer to start PRINTing
               at the left-hand margin, or to start PRINTing at the
PRINT commas   next TAB position, depending on which of these
               choices comes next. Try RUNning this example:




                                                                          34
Chapter 4                                  BEGINNER`S BASIC
                          REM columns
                          10 PRINT 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,10

              Semi-colons (;) tell the machine to PRINT whatever
PRINT semi-   follows immediately after whatever precedes it.
Colons
              Apostrophes (‘) cause whatever follows to be
PRINT         PRINTed at the left-hand margin of the next line.
apostrophes   Try out various combinations of these punctuation
              instructions to see how they operate. For example:

                          10 PRINT 1, 2, 3; 4, 5’6’ 7, 8; 9,10

              Because PRINT can be used to show the results of
              calculations, as explained in the Everyday BASIC
              part of this Chapter, the numbers in the last two
              examples dutifully appeared on screen. But now
              try replacing them with letters or words, and watch
              the computer refuse to PRINT. However, as soon
              as you put any characters inside quotation marks,
              you can RUN the program, like this:

                          10 PRINT "wham", "barn"'
                          "thank you"; "SAM"

              More information about PRINTing on screen can be
              found in Chapter 6, and commands for PRINTing
              out on paper are dealt with in Chapter 9.

              So far, this Chapter has offered a lot of theory but not
              much fun. By taking on board a few more complex
              ideas, you can write your first computer game.

              If the computer just obeyed lists of instructions line
MAKING        after line, programs would be very limited and
DECISIONS     boring. The magic begins when your machine
              thinks for itself and starts making decisions!




                                                                         35
Chapter 4                                          BEGINNER`S BASIC
                     The easiest way to get the computer to make a
IF and THEN          decision is to show it a condition and offer it a
                     choice between 'true' and 'false;', so that IF some-
                     thing is true THEN the computer will take one
                     course of action. If it is false THEN the machine
                     does something else. The Sam Coupé understands
                     the following symbols which you can use as short-
                     hand with IF - THEN statements:

                     =      means 'is equal to'

                     <>    means 'is not equal to'

                     >      means 'is greater than'

                     <      means 'is less than'

                     >=    means 'is greater than or equal to'

                     <=    means 'is less than or equal to'

                     Use NEW to wipe out any old programs in the
                     computer's memory, then type in this guessing
                     game and RUN it. The < and > characters are typed
                     by pressing [SYMB] [Q] and [SYMB] [W]. Get a
                     friend to think up and type in secret numbers, which
                     the computer will help you to discover. See how the
                     GO TO, PAUSE, IF and THEN work, how every-
                     thing between the quotations marks"" gets PRINTed
                     exactly on screen, and how the STOP brings the
                     game to an end when the number is guessed cor-
                     rectly.

                                 10 REM secret numbers
“Whoever can                     20 PRINT "Think of a number between 1 and
Predict winning                     100 and type it in secretly"
                                 30 INPUT a
Numbers has no                   40 INPUT "Find the secret number", b
Need to let off                  50 IF b<a THEN PRINT "WRONG, go higher"
Crackers.”                       60 IF b>a THEN PRINT "WRONG... try lower"
                                 70 IF b-a THEN PRINT "RIGHT. Well done!'":
        (Kai Lung)               STOP
                                 80 GO TO 40




                                                                              36
Chapter 4                                       EVERYDAY BASIC

                EVERYDAY BASIC
                The following section contains the back-bone of
                this introduction to BASIC programming. In it you
                will find all of the every-day ideas and practices
                needed for writing programs, so make sure you
                understand and try out each concept before tack-
                ling the next one, and don't try to rush through
                them. First, you need to learn three definitions
                known as 'strings', 'variables' and 'arrays'.

                A string is simply a number of characters all strung
String          together. These characters can be letters, numbers,
                spaces or graphics, and a single string can be as
                short as you wish, up to 65520 characters long.
                (You might need that many to display a whole
                screen of graphic shapes that make up a complex
                picture.) In a program, each string is defined by
                giving it its own name and immediately sticking on
                a special string symbol after that name, and then
                LETting it be equal to whatever follows in quotation
                marks. We use the 'dollar' symbol $ to represent
                'string', for example:

                            10 LET sam$ = "string along with me"

                If you look at sam$, you will see that it consists of
Substrings      20 consecutive characters made up from letters and
                spaces. When a number of consecutive characters
                are taken from a string one after the other in the
                same sequence, this is called a 'substring'. So
                whereas "long wit" is a substring of sam$, "bring
                a long whip" is not! When you are sure you
                understand this idea, try the next concept.

                You can repeat a string for as many times as you like,
String$(n,a$)   by putting it inside a pair of brackets with the
                number of repeats you require. The special
                command STRING$ is used to achieve this. RUN
                this little joke:




                                                                         37
Chapter 4                                   EVERYDAY BASIC


                        10 PRINT STRING$ (8, "ha")

            Now you are ready for a more serious idea.

Using       In a calculation, when numbers are represented by
VARIABLES   something else they are called variables. If you
            think of a variable as something that represents a
            value, then you will begin to understand one of the
            most powerful features of the computer. We have
            already come across variables in the simple form of:

                         l0 LET x=2
                         20 PRINT "THE ANSWER IS "; x+x

            which, when the program is RUN, results in 'THE
            ANSWER IS 4' appearing on the screen. Now try
            changing the value of x, and RUN it again.

Arrays      Very often, you will want to use a whole set of
            similar variables, for a weekly bank balance or a list
            of football results. An array is a group of such
            variables that are distinguished from one another by
            a number written in brackets after the name of the
            array. This number represents a DIMension or a
            space in the computer's memory that is reserved for
            the array to occupy. The name of an array can be up
            to ten characters long, excluding any spaces, and
            the number in brackets can be anything between 1
            and 65535.

            The statement for setting up the DIMensions of an
DIM         array is DIM, and is used like this:
                          DIM a (100)
            We'll come across it again at a more advanced level.
            So far we have glossed over one of the most impor-
LET         tant processes in the computer's brain. The key-
            word LET is at the heart of all BASIC programming.
            It is used to define all variables, or to give them some
            sort of value, as in:




                                                                       38
Chapter 4                                    EVERYDAY BASIC
                         l0 LET x-l

             But your Sam Coupé allows you to make as many
             LETs as you want at the same time. You can use
             long string and array names and set up all sorts of
             variables in a single line, simply by dividing them
             with commas. For example:

                         10 LET x-1, flag-2, alph$-"yummy"

             A variable that represents a number is called, not
numeric      surprisingly, a numeric variable. You can choose
variables    any name you want for it, providing you follow
             these simple rules: the name must begin with a
             letter, any letters or numbers or spaces can follow
             the first letter up to a total of 32 characters. Spaces
             don't count as characters. So the following numeric
             variable names are acceptable:
             x, SAM ENCHANTED EVENING or R2D2. But
             2R2D is not acceptable and neither is the use of a
             keyword like PRINT. FOR-NEXT variables are
             treated like ordinary numeric variables.

String and   Variables can also be used to represent strings and
             arrays. The rules are the same, except the variable
array        name is limited to a total often characters long, and
variables    it must be followed by the character $. For example,
             A$, R2D2$ and GUITAR $
CLEAR
             Variables can be ordered to vanish, by using a
             command telling them to CLEAR off. When CLEAR
             is typed in, it destroys every variable in your pro-
             gram, and frees up the space in the computer's
             memory which they occupied. If you have set up
             any variables, use CLEAR now, and get ready for
             the next important concept. If necessary, read
             through the last section of 'Beginner's BASIC' con-
             cerning IF and THEN, because things are about to
             get more complex!




                                                                       39
Chapter 4                                  EVERYDAY BASIC

ELSE        The Sam Coupé also understands the idea of IF
            qualified by ELSE, which must come at the start of
            a new statement in a line. Normally when the
            statement following an IF is false, the program
            jumps to the next line. But if the IF - THEN pair has
            an associated ELSE later in the line, the program
            continues with the statement following the ELSE.
            On the other hand, if the condition is true, the line
            will only be executed up to the ELSE. For example:

                       10 REM liar
                       20 LET x-1
                       30 IF x-1 THEN PRINT 'TRUE": ELSE
                       PRINT "FALSE"

            When this is RUN, truth is rewarded, but now
            change line 20 by giving x another value, and RUN
            into trouble.

            You can think of that example as a 'short IF'. But a
            'long IF' can work over a number of lines by
            omitting THEN. Try changing the value of x after
            RUNning this:

                       10 REM moody
                       20 LET x-1
                       30 IF x-1
                       40 PRINT'HAHAHA"
                       50 PRINT "snort"
                       60 ELSE PRINT'BOOHOO"
                       70 PRINT "SNIFF"
                       80 END IF
END IF      So if x-1, "HAHAHA" and "snort" results, but if
            x < > 1 we would get "BOOHOO" and "SNIFF". Of
            course the lines can contain more than one state-
            ment, but the IF routine must end with END IF.




                                                                    40
Chapter 4                                           EVERYDAY BASIC

ELSE IF             The condition ELSE IF has a special meaning. Try
                    typing this in:

                                5 REM vague numbers
                                10 PRINT "type in a number between
                                   1 and 9"
                                20 INPUT x; CLS
                                30 IF x-1
                                40 PRINT "one"
                                50 ELSE IF x< 5
                                60 PRINT "less than 5"
                                70 PRINT "honestly"
                                80 ELSEIFx-8
                                90 PRINT "eight"
                                100 ELSE
                                110 PRINT "something else"
                                120 END IF
                                130 STOP

“Disorder is        If x=l, line 40is executed, followed by line 150.
always in a
                    If x=2,3 or 4, lines 60 and 70 are executed, and then
hurry”              line 130.
      (Napoleon
       Bonaparte)   If x=8, line 90 is executed, then line 130.

                    If x= any other value, line 110 is executed, then line
                    130. So once the computer knows that any condi-
                    tion is true, the lines and statements after it are
                    executed, and when another ELSE IF or ELSE is
                    encountered the program jumps straight to a posi-
                    tion immediately after END IF. Line numbers and
                    the numbers of statements in any line are irrelevant.
                    You are allowed to 'nest' long and short IFs inside
                    a long IF, but you can't 'nest' a long IF between a
                    short IF and its associated ELSE.




                                                                             41
Chapter 4                                   EVERYDAY BASIC
            If you feel like taking a BREAK at this point in the
            proceedings, THEN now is the time, ELSE get ready
            to make your computer work for a living! END IF.

            Imagine you have to prepare a list of items for every
            day of the year. You could start by typing in a line
            for day 1, and keep typing until you reach 365
            (unless it's a leap year!) This would be so tedious
            that there are four BASIC commands dedicated to
            making this sort of task as easy as possible, FOR,
            NEXT, TO and STEP, and they are used to make the
            computer perform the same job over and over
            again.

FOR-NEXT    FOR and NEXT are always used together to cut
            down repetitive programming. RUN this example:

                        10 REM calendar
                        20 FOR day-1 TO 365: PRINT day:
                        NEXT day

            As you scroll up the screen by pressing [RETURN],
TO          you can see that the use of TO in your FOR-NEXT
            loop has instantly set the limitations of the values in
            your PRINT statement. Naturally, the numbers go
            up one at a time, but by introducing the idea of
            handling values in STEPs, this can be varied.

STEP        For example, your Sam Coupé will instantly change
            its calendar from days to weeks if you tell it to work
            in STEPs of 7:

                        20 FOR day-1 TO 365 STEP 7:
                        PRINT day: NEXT day

            Easy isn't it. STEPping is not limited to whole
            numbers or positive values. Try out this sort of
            example:
                          FOR n-l TO 100 STEP 3.142
                         FOR x-500 TO 250 STEP -25




                                                                      42
Chapter 4                                   EVERYDAY BASIC
             FOR-NEXT variables are treated just like ordinary
             numeric variables, so there are no special rules to
             learn. However, if you want to do something more
             ambitious than writing lists, there are several com-
             mands that are ready and able to help you. Luckily
             they all behave in BASIC very much as you would
             expect in English. DO, LOOP, WHILE, UNTIL and
             EXIT IF are all explained in the last section of this
             Chapter,'Advanced SAM BASIC'.

             A collection of statements arranged in lines that all
subroutine   act together is known as a routine. In computer
             programs it is very common to want similar tasks to
             be performed in different places, but it is also very
             tiresome to type in the same lines over and over
             again. So these lines are isolated in what are known
             as 'subroutines', and they can be called up from
             anywhere in the program to do their job as many
             times as necessary. If you think of how the command
             GO TO works, then you will easily understand how
             to GO to a SUBrouline, for example:

GO SUB                   GO SUB 500

             instructs the computer to leave its present place in
             a program and jump to line 500 in order to carry out
             whatever task awaits it there.

RETURN       It may be helpful to mark the start of each subrou-
             tine with a REM statement, for your own conven-
             ience. This is optional, of course, but there is no
             choice in how you mark the end of a subroutine.
             The command RETURN is always used, like this
             (non working) example:

                         500 REM pretend subroutine
                         510 ...all the lines that form this
                              subroutine
                         600 RETURN




                                                                     43
Chapter 4                                     EVERYDAY BASIC

CALCULA-      If you look at the multiple sound effects program
TIONS         that is featured on the demonstration cassette as
              well as in Chapter 8, you will see how useful
              subroutines are.

              If all this theory seems concerned with complicated
              programs, BASIC allows some very common every-
              day operations. You can use the Sam Coupé as a
              simple calculator to perform arithmetic tasks. After
              typing PRINT followed by your calculation, all you
              have to do is hit the [RETURN] key. Nothing can be
              simpler than this:

                          PRINT 2+2

              You don't even have to RUN it!

              The computer will obey all of these commands:
+-*/X         + the plus sign always signals addition

              - in calculations, the conventional minus sign is
              used

              * but for multiplication an asterisk is recognised.

              / and division is made using this symbol

              X this is the exponentiation symbol. It means' raise
              a given number to a given power' which is exactly
              the same as multiplying a number by itself, so that::

                          PRINT 3 X 5 is the same
                         as typing in:

                          PRINT 3*3*3*3*3

expressions   A combination of calculations is called an expres-
              sion, and you should be aware of the fact that your
              computer handles expressions in a strict order of
              priority. Any multiplication and division are calcu-
              lated first, in order of appearance from left to right.
              Only after they have been dealt with will additions
              and subtractions be attended to, again in order from
              left to right. You can get round this rigid system by




                                                                        44
Chapter 4                                    EVERYDAY BASIC
            using brackets ( ), and then anything inside the
            brackets is evaluated first and treated as a single
            number. For example:

                        PRINT 10*10-(25*4)

            These days, an electronic calculator is expected to
MATHEMATI   do a whole lot more than simple arithmetic, and
CAL         your Sam Coupé has already been taught to handle
FUNCTIONS   mathematical and trigonometrical functions, using
            these abbreviations. We can't teach you maths or
            trigonometry here, so if you are not interested in
            these subjects you may as well skip the following
            section:

            EXP
            is an exponential growth function, defined by
            EXP x=eXx

            SQR
            calculates the SQuare Root of a positive number, n.
            That is to say, it finds out what number has to be
            multiplied by itself to give n.

            LN
            is the inverse of an EXPonential function, and is the
            Logarithmic Number function. 'Common' loga-
            rithms use the numeric base 10, but LN calculates
            'natural' logarithms which use the base e. To find
            logarithms to any other base, just divide the 'natural'
            logarithm by the natural logarithm of the base.

            INT
            Arguments that consist of a load of numbers either
            side of a decimal point can often give very messy
            results in BASIC programming. It would be much
            more convenient to use whole numbers, which are
            known as INTegers. This function always rounds
            down to the relevant whole number, which can be
            either a positive or a negative number.




                                                                      45
Chapter 4                                                 EVERYDAY BASIC
                          SGN
“I don’t believe          is a function that shows whether a mathematical
                          argument is positive or negative. It is short for
in mathematics”
                          'signum' or 'sign', and can give three alternative
      (Albert Einstein)
                          results:

                          0      if the argument is zero
                          +1     if it is positive, and
                          -1      if the argument is negative.

                          ABS
                          converts an argument into a positive number, by
                          completely ignoring any negative signs.

                          You would expect your computer to cope with the
TRIGONOMET-               sort of trigonometrical functions to be found on a
RICAL                     pocket calculator, and of course it can.
FUNCTIONS
                          PI
                          is the Greek letter , and is used to summon up a
                          useful number which begins 3.14159653 and goes
                          on for ever. In trigonometry, PI is the tool for
                          calculating aspects of circles and spheres, such as
                          the perimeter of a circle (PI * diameter), and so on.




                                                                                  46
Chapter 4                                    EVERYDAY BASIC


            Supposing you want to know more about a circle,
            where a point has moved from the right-hand side
            of the x-axis up along the perimeter for a distance a,
            and stopped at the position b. We don't refer to a as
            the number of degrees in the angle between the x-
            axis and the line from the centre of the circle to point
            b, because the Sam Coupé uses radians instead of
            degrees.

            To convert from radians to degrees you divide by PI
            and then multiply by 180. And to convert degrees to
            radians, you divide by 180 and then multiply by PI.

            SIN
            is a function that calculates how far point b is above
            the x-axis, and this distance is known as its SINe.

            COS
            calculates how far point b is to the right of the y-axis,
            the distance being known as its COSine. If b goes
            to the left of the y-axis, its COSine value becomes
            negative. Similarly, if it drops below the x-axis, the
            SINe results in a negative value.

            TAN
            is the function that gives the TANgent of a, which is
            simply the SINe divided by the COSine.

            ASN, ACS and ATN
            are short for arcsine, arcosine and arctangent, and
            these are the functions used to find values of a that
            have given a particular SINe, COSine or TANgent

Functions   Those mathematical and trigonometrical key words
            act equally well inside computer programs, along
            with several others you have yet to come across.
            Collectively they are known as 'functions', and what
            they have in common is the fact that they all work




                                                                        47
Chapter 4                                   EVERYDAY BASIC

            with numbers in order to give a result. Functions are
            used by typing them in and then giving them an
            argument to work on. They can be mixed in with
            other sorts of operations in the same expression,
            but they will always be worked out before those
            operations unless they are placed inside brackets.

FREE        Discover how much FREE memory is available for
            programming by using this function now:

                         PRINT FREE
            and then type in a line or two of program. Check
            and see how much memory that has been taken up
            by using FREE again. You will discover how mem-
            ory is calculated and what gobbles it up in Chapter
            10.

            Another function you can try out is the one that tells
LEN         you what the LENgth of a string is, like this:

                        PRINT LEN "antidlsestablishmentari-
                       anism"

            or if you prefer,

                        PRINT LEN "SAM"

            Even though you may be in the early stages of
            learning to program your Sam Coupé, you have
            probably grown impatient by now and LOADed up
            some of the programs on the 'Flash' demonstration
            cassette, and I can't really blame you. Before we go
            on to more advanced SAM BASIC, choose one of the
            longer ready-made demonstration programs and
            LOAD it now, because you are about to take a few
            enjoyable liberties with it!
LIST
            If you tell the Coupe to LIST the current program, it
            will do just that, and display the listings from begin-
            ning to end. What may be more useful is to ask for
            a listing from a particular line number, or for a part




                                                                      48
Chapter 4                                      EVERYDAY BASIC

               of the program contained between two line num-
               bers. For example:

                            LIST 500 will display everything from
                         line 500 to the end of the program.
                            LIST 500 TO 1000 will give you a listing
                        starting at line 500 up to and including line
                        1000.

               If the line number you want to start from is left out,
               then the first line of the program is assumed. Simi-
               larly, if the line number you want to end with is
               omitted, the last line of the entire program is as-
               sumed. Try out a few LIST commands now.

HOW TO         There are several tricks of the trade that can help
BEAUTIFY       make the layout of your BASIC programs easier to
               refer to and a whole lot more pleasing to the eye. If
YOUR BASIC     you want to highlight something for your own
               reference and a REM statement doesn't fit the bill,
               then use the [INV] key to make that part of the
               program stand out in INVerse video. The highlight-
               ing is turned off again by pressing [SYMB] [INV] to-
               gether.

               The first rule of BASIC is that every line of program
AUTOMATIC      must have its own line number, and your number-
LINE NUMBERS   ing system can get very messy after a while. The
               Sam Coupé is ready and willing to help out. It has
               a very convenient feature that AUTOmatically
               numbers your lines of program. Enter AUTO by
               itself, and the computer takes the current line number
               where the program cursor is, then adds ten at every
               new line. This won't work if the current line number
               is less than 10 or more than 61439. If you need to
               skip over a block of line numbers, just delete the
               AUTOmatic number and type in a new one, fol-
               lowed by the rest of the line. AUTO will carry on
               from there, numbering in steps of ten.




                                                                        49
Chapter 4                                                      EVERYDAY BASIC

                            Here are some variations:

                                         AUTO        numbers after here in
                                                     steps of ten
                                         AUTO 150    numbers from line 150
                                                     in steps of ten
                                         AUTO 150, 5 numbers from line 150
                                                     in steps of five

                            Of course you can choose any line number and any
                            step you want. Direct commands, such as STOP, or
                            deleting the line number offered will turn AUTO off.

RENUMbering                 RENUM
                            This instruction will RENUMber all your program
                            lines in steps often, starting with the first line as 10.

                            RENUM n TO m
                            RENUMbers part of the program, starting from line
                            n, up to and including line m. If n is omitted then
                            it starts from the first line, and ifm is left out, the last
                            line is assumed.

                            RENUM LINE L
                            makes number L the first new line number.

                            RENUM STEP s
                            uses numbers in whatever step s you instruct. The
                            slice of program, LINE and STEP can be used or left
                            out as you wish, but they must occur in the follow-
                            ing order:

                                         RENUM n TO m LINE L STEP s
“Mathematics is
the subject in              When RENUMbering, all your instructions like GO
                            TO, GO SUB, RESTORE, RUN, LINE, ON etc. are
which we never              dealt with, but any expressions such as GO TO VAL
know what we’re             "100" will be ignored. The screen is used to hold
talking about.”             temporary data during a RENUM operation, and is
       (Bertrand Russell)   cleared at the end of the task.




                                                                                           50
Chapter 4                                  EVERYDAY BASIC

pretty      LIST FORMAT or LUST FORMAT
LISTing     is a technique that creates an automatic 'pretty'
            LISTing in which each statement of the program is
            automatically given its own line, and these lines are
            indented to help you read the program more clearly.
            The first six columns on the left-hand side of the
            screen have been reserved for line numbers and
            spaces, and programs can have up to 65279 lines.

                        LIST FORMAT 1 or 2

            produces an automatically indented listing by one
            or two spaces every time a certain keyword is recog-
            nised with other keywords restoring the original
            setting. These keywords are IF, ELSE, END IF, ON,
            DEF PROC.END PROC, FOR, NEXT, DO, LOOP,
            EXIT IF and LOOP IF. And if you wonder what
            some of those keywords mean, you are about to
            find out in the final section of this Chapter.

                        LIST FORMAT 0

            returns the listing to its normal unindented state.

            Try a 'pretty' listing of one of your programs, and see
            what happens!

            ADVANCED SAM BASIC
RANDOM      Imagine asking your Sam Coupé every morning,
NUMBERS     "How are you today?" and the answer was always
            the same, "Very well, thank you." What a predict-
            able relationship that would be. The easiest way to
            introduce an element of chance or surprise into a
            program is to throw numbered options into an
            electronic pot and allow the computer to pull one
            out at random. After one has been selected and
            used, it gets thrown back into the pot. So all sorts of
            responses could result from your prompt, each with
            an equal chance of random selection.




                                                                      51
Chapter 4                                   EVERYDAY BASIC
            RANDOMIZE
            is the keyword that kicks off this selection process.
            It uses the number of frames elapsed since the SAM
            Coupe was switched on to make its choice.

            RANDOMIZE n
            sets the random number 'seed' to your own choice,
            with n between 1 and 65535.

            RND
            is the function that pulls a number out of the pot
            from a fixed sequence of 65536 numbers, which
            has been thoroughly stirred up, and gives a result
            that is a floating point number. Floating point
            arithmetic keeps the digits of a number separate
            from the position of the decimal point. You can use
            the INTeger function to cut off all those digits after
            the decimal point, but there is a much easier way to
            generate whole random numbers, by using

                        RND(x)

            which returns a whole number between 0 and x. So
            you can now go back to the Secret Numbers game
            on page 36, and let the computer act as your play-
            mate in thinking up the number without any help.
            Simply get rid of line 20, and replace line 30 with

                        30 LET a - RND (100)

            By using the random numbers technique you can
            program the Sam Coupé to act as a pair of dice, a
            card dealer, an ever-changing galaxy or to choose
            from hundreds of unpredictable answers to the
            question, "How are you today?'"

DATA        But what if you don't want a random number
            element, and need the computer to refer to a strict
            order of given information? This information, or
            DATA, can be put anywhere you want in a program,
            waiting to be used by the computer in much the




                                                                     52
Chapter 4                                  ADVANCED SAM BASIC

“It is a capital       same way as it waits for you to INPUT via the
                       keyboard, and each DATA statement is made up of
Mastake to             a list of expressions separated by commas. The way
Theorize before        you call up these items of DATA is to READ them.
One has data”
                       Try out this routine:
  (Sir Arthur Conan
              Doyle)               10 READ w, x, y, 2
                                   20 PRINT w, x, y, z
                                   30 DATA 1, 22, 333, 4444
                                   40 STOP

READ                   What you have done is to tell the machine to READ
                       four items of DATA and allocate them with the
                       variables w, x, y, and z. When the computer READs
                       the list of DATA for the first time, it takes the first
                       expression. Next time round it takes the second
                       expression, and so on until all the DATA has been
                       READ. Now change the order of your PRINT state-
                       ment, and see what happens. Finally, remove the
                       last item of DATA from line 30, and watch the
                       computer search in vain.

RESTORE                You can make further use of the expressions in a list
                       of DATA by instructing the computer to RESTORE
                       or reset the variables. Repair lines 20 and 30 of that
                       last routine, and then add the following lines:

                                   5 READ p,q
                                   6 PRINT p, q
                                   7 RESTORE 5
                       Run it once and note the effect. Now remove line 7
                       and see what effect the missing RESTORE has.
                       Variables are also automatically RESTOREd when-
                       ever a BASIC program is LOADed, or RUN.




                                                                                 53
Chapter 4                        ADVANCED SAM BASIC

READ LINE    String variables can also be READ, e.g.

                         READ a$, b$, c$
                         DATA "one" "fine" "day"

             READ UNE allows quotes in DATA statements to
             be omitted. So if

                         DATA sam, "dog", 123

             was part of your program, READ LINE a$ would
TRUNC$       first make a$-"sam", then "dog" and finally "123"
             with successive READs. Any words without quotes
             that are used in DATA statements must be legal
             numeric values. So sam1 is fine, but 1x is not.

             Another useful function for taking DATA from string
             arrays is the ability to TRUNCate them, be deleting
             any trailing spaces. So whereas

                         DIM a$(10,10) LET a$(1)-"sam":
                         PRINT a$(l); "my"

             will PRINT "sam my", the use of
             PRINT TRUNC$ a$(l) results in "sammy"

             It should be made dear that names up to 10 charac-
DIMensions   ters long are allowed when DIMensioning arrays,
             not including any spaces. The DIMensions that
             appear as numbers inside brackets can be between
             1 and 65535, and the total size of the array is limited
             only by the available memory. This example would
             use up 200K:

                         DIM name$ (10000,20)
                         DIM coords (100,2)

LENGTH       Array DIMensions can be returned by using
             LENGTH, for one or two dimensional arrays, and
             variable addresses. So for example, after
             DIMensioning a$ as (4,6)

                         LENGTH (2,a$) would give 6




                                                                       54
Chapter 4                      ADVANCED SAM BASIC
            The address of the first byte of a number can be
            found by using:

                        LENGTH (0,n)

            which is useful for telling CALL the location of a
            variable, so that it can be modified. Brackets are
            required after the name of a numeric array, such
            as:

                        LENGTH (l,n ())

            Apart from commands like RESTORE and FOR-
            NEXT, there are other ways of making certain sec-
            tions of computer programs even more useful.

DO-LOOP     A loop refers to any part of a computer program that
            is repeated. The command LOOP is always marked
            by the instruction DO, in much the same way as a
            FOR-NEXT routine, so that:

                        10 DO
                        20 PRINT "PLAY IT AGAIN SAM";
                        30 LOOP

            will go round in circles for ever. So it is useful to
            qualify DO and LOOP commands if you don't want
            to repeat something for a specific number of times.

WHILE and   DO WHILE (condition) results in the part of the
UNTIL       program between DO and LOOP being executed
            WHILE that particular condition remains true. Al-
            ternatively, you can use the computer to execute
            that part of the program between DO and LOOP
            while a condition is false, but to stop as soon as it
            becomes true, using DO UNTIL (condition).
            Similarly, LOOP WHILE and LOOP UNTIL will
            allow conditional LOOPing at the end of a DO-
            LOOP. Conditions can be used at both the entry




                                                                    55
Chapter 4                      ADVANCED SAM BASIC
            and exit to the LOOP if you like.

            And finally, IF can be used to affect DO-LOOPs in
            two ways. EXIT IF (condition) can be used to
            leave the routine from somewhere in the middle
            rather than at the DO or LOOP. If the specified
            condition after the EXIT IF is true, the program will
            jump to the statement that follows LOOP, otherwise
            the routine carries on. LOOP IF (condition)
            branches from the middle of the routine back to the
            DO if that condition is true. If the condition isn't
            true, then again everything continues to the end of
            the routine.

            Because these BASIC commands consist of words
            which have a similar meaning in English, their use
            should become clear very quickly. There is also a
            group of three functions that consist of short English
            words, whose use is equally obvious. AND, OR and
            NOT are used to combine two or more logical
            operations.

            IF something is true AND something else is also true
            THEN that relationship can be exploited, for ex-
            ample:

                        10 IF a$-"true" AND x-1 THEN GO
                        SUB 500

            But a relationship can be made true whenever one
            thing OR the other is true, such as:

                        10 IF x > 1 OR sky$-"blue" THEN
                        PRINT x

            Perversely, the use of NOT makes false things true
            and true relationships false, when used on its own
            or in combination with AND, or OR. Try LETting
            x,y and a$ have suitable values, then RUN this until
            you understand how it works:




                                                                     56
Chapter 4                       ADVANCED SAM BASIC
                        10 IF NOT x < > y OR NOT a$-"sam"
                        THEN NEW: GO TO 10

            These logical expressions can be put in brackets just
            like numerical expressions, and they are worked
            through with NOT having he highest priority, fol-
            lowed by AND, and with OR having the lowest
            priority. In actual fact, by changing relationships,
            you can dispense with NOT altogether.

            A particular statement can be selected from the rest
ON          of a line of program by using the keyword ON.

                        ON x: PRINT "one": PRINT "two":
                        GO SUB 100

            will PRINT "one" if x=l, "two" if x=2, and GO SUB
            line 100 if x=3. If x has a value of zero, or is greater
            than the number of statements following ON, the
            program continues with the next line.

FUNCTION    The function keys on the right hand side of the SAM
KEYS        Coupe keyboards have been pre-defined as fol-
            lows:

            [F0]LIST [RETURN]
            [Fl ] RENUM [RETURN]
            [F2] PRINT
            [F3] MODE
            [F4] RUN [RETURN]
            [F5] CONTINUE [RETURN]
            [F6] CLS # [RETURN]
            [F7] LOAD " " [RETURN]
            [F8] LOAD " " code [RETURN]
            [F9] BOOT [RETURN]

            Please refer to Chapter 6 for redefining key codes.

            Function names can have any length, must begin
DEFining    with a letter and continue with letters or numbers.
FuNctions




                                                                       57
Chapter 4                        ADVANCED SAM BASIC
             For example:

                         DEF FN charset - DPEEK SVAR 566
                         +256

             would give the location of the character set, with the
             command PRINT FN charset. String function
             names must end with $, such as

                         DEF FN Left$ (a$,n)-a$ ( TO n)

             Functions do not have to have brackets if there are
             no arguments, but any variable names used inside
             brackets will be local to the FN, and can only be one
             letter long.

             Here are a few more useful functions that you
             should become familiar with. They are all designed
             to help with the handling of strings.

String       STR$
Conversion   converts numbers and numeric expressions into
             strings, giving the same result as if the number was
             to be displayed on screen by a PRINT statement.

                         PRINT STR$ (30*5)

             VAL
             converts strings back into numbers, and the string
             which is used as its argument can contain any nu-
             meric expression. A similar function is also avail-
             able called VAL$, which uses a string as an argu-
             ment and gives a string as its result. E.g.

                         PRINT VAL "69*2+3"

             CODE
             can be used to give the first character in a string, and
             if the string is empty, the result 0 is given. E.g.'

                         PRINT CODE a$
                         PRINT CODE "x"




                                                                        58
Chapter 4                        ADVANCED SAM BASIC
             CHR$
             gives a single character string when it is applied to
             the code number of that character. Please see
             Chapter 6 for character codes. E.g.

                         PRINT CHR$ 65

Searching    INSTR (n, a$, b$)
Strings      will search for b$ inside a$, starting at position n. Its
             position is returned when found, or the result 0 is
             given if the search is unsuccessful. By omitting n,
             the search begins from position 1.


PROCEDURES   You will be pleased to discover that there are certain
             procedures that make programming easier! 'Mod-
             ules' can be created that execute a specific task
             without affecting the main program, but first they
             have to be defined.


DEFining     DEF PROC name
PROCedures   kicks off the DEFinition of a named PROCedure,
             and DEF PROC must be the first keyword in a
             program line (although preceding spaces and colour
             control codes are allowed). The procedure name
             must start with a letter, followed by a string of letters
             or numbers or "$". Spaces are NOT allowed as any
             part of this name, and upper and lower case letters
             are treated exactly the same. But you can follow the
             procedure name by a list of parameters, which must
             be the names of variables, or you can use the DATA
             keyword. They automatically become LOCAL to
             the procedure. When DATA is used instead of a
             parameter list, no assignments are made, but the list
             of actual parameters that occur after the procedure
             has been called can be dealt with by using READ
             plus the function ITEM, which is explained below.




                                                                         59
Chapter 4                        ADVANCED SAM BASIC
             The location of a procedure in the program has no
             effect on the speed of the program whatsoever.


             LOCAL
             specifies a list of variables, including arrays, which
             you want to be local to any procedure anywhere in
             the program.


             ITEM
             is a function that relays information concerning the
             next ITEM to be READ in a DATA statement. The
             result 0 is given when there are no more ITEMs, 1
             is given if the next ITEM is a string type, and if it is
             a numeric type, 2 is given.

ENDing       END PROC
PROCedures   acts as you would expect, by marking the end of a
             named procedure. This allows the computer to
             avoid ploughing through all the statements between
             DEF PROC and END PROC unless that particular
             procedure is called up. END PROC erases any
             LOCAL variables, and restores their 'normal' values,
             if they exist.


DEFAULTed    DEFAULT
Variables    There are certain circumstances, usually to do with
             procedures, when you might want to create a vari-
             able only if it doesn't already exist. This is achieved
             buy using the command DEFAULT. For example

                          DEFAULT x-20

             will make x=20 if x is not already existing, other-
             wise x will keep its current value.


Discarded    POP
addresses    will discard a GOSUB/PROCedure/RETURN ad-
             dress, and POP x will assign a discarded RETURN




                                                                        60
Chapter 4                                 ADVANCED SAM BASIC

                      line number to a variable such as x.

                      In a DEF PROC list, variables (including arrays) are
REFerences
                      passed by REFerence if their parameter is preceded
                      by REF. This means that the variable is renamed to
                      the name given in the DEF PROC list, and any
                      changes to it will persist outside of the procedure.
                      Otherwise variables will have values assigned to
                      them from the list in the procedure call. It is possible
                      to omit any or all values, and supply them from
                      inside the procedure, using DEFAULT. With non-
                      REFerenced variables, only the value is passed to
                      the procedure, and the variable is LOCAL.


LABELing              Variables can be created by using LABEL at the start
                      of aline, followed by a legal numeric variable name.
                      When any part of the program is run via GO TO etc.,
“Today there’s        the newly created variables are given the name after
law and order in      any LABELs in the program, and their values are set
everything”           to the line number with that LABEL. E.g.
      (Maxim Gorky)
                                  500 LABEL tea: PRINT "two sugars
                                  please"
                                  600 GO TO tea

                      The variables are re-created if CLEAR is used, or the
                      program is [EDIT]ed.

                      There are certain bytes of the Sam Coupé's memory
System                that have been set aside for special uses, known as
variablse             system variables. You can have a look at them by
                      PEEKing, and some of them can be POKEd without
                      doing any harm to the system, but they are not the
                      same as the variables used in BASIC and the com-
                      puter won't recognise their names. The hundreds
                      of system variables are detailed in the Technical
                      Manual, and the most useful system variables are
                      listed in the Appendix of this Manual. SVAR is used




                                                                                 61
Chapter 4                      ADVANCED SAM BASIC



            to give the address of a system variable, when
            followed by its number. This can be used to
            customise system variables such as changing the
            lower-case cursor from " * "to "x" in the following
            way:

                         POKE SVAR 1, "x"


            Finally, if you've been looking for PEEK and
            POKE details, you can treat yourself to the
            examination of memory in Chapter 10.




                                                                  62
Chapter 5
COLOUR
AND
LIGHT
  using the PALETTE
  PEN and PAPER
  the four video MODES
  making decisions, IF and THEN
 BRIGHT and FLASH
 INVERSE and OVER




‘Enjoy a rain-
bow without for-
getting the forces
that made it.’
     (Mark Twain)




 ‘You can have
 any colour you
 want, so long as
 it’s black!’
        (Henry Ford)




                                  63
Chapter 5                                             Colour and Light

              In the past, anyone wanting to enjoy a wide range
              of superb colours in computer programs had to
              invest in relatively expensive machines. The SAM
              Coupe changes all that! It has four video MODES
              built into it, and each of them offers no less than 128
              colours to choose from.


The PALLETE   Imagine yourself as an artist equipped with one of
              those gently-shaped boards on which you squeeze
              out colours from different tubes of paint. Artists call
              this board a PALETTE and the Sam Coupé provides
              you with just such a board for holding all the colours
              that you can use. The paint manufacturers make
              128 different coloured tubes, and your PALETTE
              has room for 16 at a time, which it holds in num-
              bered paint pots.

              Every time you switch on, and each time you use the
              command PALETTE, you are given 16 pre-set
              colours to work with, and they are coded from 0 to
              15 as follows:

                  0 black                 8 black
                  1 deep blue             9 bright blue
                  2 deep red             10 bright red
                  3 magneta (purple)     11 bright magneta
                  4 deep green           12 bright green
                  5 cyan (light blue)    13 bright cyan
                  6 deep yellow          14 bright yellow
                  7 white                15 bright white


              There are two tubes of black paint simply because
              your computer prefers things that way! Now imag-
              ine that you are choosing which extra colours you
              want to use for painting your own masterpiece, and
              you want to see the whole range available for use.




                                                                        64
Chapter 5                                              Colour and Light


Displaying the   Switch on and type in this colour-chart program:
Colour Chart
                              10 FOR c-0 TO 127 STEP 8
                              20 FOR p-0 TO 7
                              30 PALETTE p+8,p+c
                              40 PRINT p+c; TAB 3; PAPER p+8;
                                 STRING$ (29," ")
                              50 NEXT p
                              60 PRINT
                              70 PRINT "Press any key"
                              80 PAUSE
                              90 CLS
                              100 NEXT c
                              110 PALETTE


                 Make sure there is a space between the quotes in
                 Line 40, and RUN the program.


                 What you should see on your screen now is a colour
                 chart of the new tubes of paint on offer eight at a
                 time, with their code numbers printed in front of
                 them. It's possible that some users have only got a
                 black-and-white television for displaying pictures
                 and I apologise, but I can't think up names for 128
                 different shades of grey. For anyone enjoying
                 glorious colour displays, you can see if you agree
                  with my descriptions in the colour-chart table be-
                 low.




                                                                       65
Chapter 5                                                   Colour and Light


COLOUR CHART TABLE

0    pitch black    32   Burgundy       64   grass         96    damp straw
1    true blue      33   plum           65   slime         97    slug belly
2    brick red      34   hellfire       66   leaf green    98    wild honey
3    magenta        35   strike-me pink 67   sick parrot   99    weak tea
4    leaf green     36   butterscotch 68     lime          100   fern green
5    cyan           37   hog foot       69   jade          101    spring bud
6    banana         38   orange         70   apple green   102    cowardice
7    paper white    39   shrimp         71   mint dulep    103   papyrus

8    charcoal      40    sunset red    72    algae         104   sweetcorn
9    electric blue 41    mauve         73    sage          105   oyster
10   poppy         42    scarlet       74    kiwi fruit    106   apricot
11   lavender      43    shocking pink 75    olive green   107   piglet pink
12   emerald green 44    sandstorm     76    bowling green 108   envy
13   sky blue      45    doggy tongue 77     greenfly      109   China tea
14   primrose      46    pineapple     78    gooseberry    110   cold custard
15   snowflake     47    guava         79    lettuce       111   daffodil

16   navy blue      48   woad          80    cold steel    112   mushroom
17   peacock        49   misery blue   81    baby blue     113   glazed grape
18   deep purple    50   geranium      82    shark         114   salmon pink
19   Picasso        51   amethyst      83    lapis lazuli  115   shrunk violet
20   denim          52   moleskin blue 84    ghostly green 116    pistachio
21   bluebell       53   Pluto blue    85    turquoise     117   frost bite
22   Parma violet   54   terracotta    86    sea spume     118   parchment
23   bluegrass      55   pomegranate 87      duck egg blue 119   dandruff

24   Atlantic      56    aubergine     88    cold fish    120    turnip
25   Mediterranean 57    blueberry     89    pastel blue  121     iris
26   violet        58    Coupe rose    90    pumice       122    caucasian
27   dusk blue     59    coral pink    91    purple haze 123      rose pink
28   dolphin       60    damp squid    92    blue bile    124    chlorophyl
29   sapphire      61    bilberry      93    Neptune blue 125     ice blue
30   powder blue 62      tuna          94    Sargasso sea 126    flax
31   Wedgewood 63        twilight      95    storm cloud 127     moonlight




                                                                                 66
Chapter 5                                                    Colour and Light

BORDER                 Don't forget that you can change the colour of the
                       BORDER around the useable screen area, and the
                       command BORDER changes the picture's surround-
                       ing frame to any colour in your PALETTE from 0 to
                       15. For example:

                                     BORDER 1

                       changes the screen BORDER to deep blue, with the
                       'normal' PALETTE.

                       An artist needs something to paint on as well as tools
PEN and                to paint with, and you are provided with a PEN and
PAPER                  PAPER to achieve this. Every character or graphic
                       image that you PRINT onto your screen can have a
                       different background or PAPER colour, and you
                       can select a different colour PEN as well. You may
                        use the command INK instead of PEN if you prefer,
                       it will still appear in the programme listing as PEN!
 "The pen is           Try changing the colour of your screen background
mightier than          with:
the sword"
                                    PAPER 6: PRINT "bumble bee"
(Cardinal Richelieu)
                       which will appear as black on yellow. Now change
                       your PEN to red with:

                                    PRINT PEN 2; "well red"

                       and experiment with different colour combina-
                       tions. If you prefer a temporary state, the command
                       OVER can be used. Please see Glosary.

                       This computer can change its style of video display
SCREEN                 to suit your needs! There are four screen MODES
MODES                  available for your use, and each one uses different
                       amounts of memory, and offers different attributes.
                       A new screen MODE is selected simply by typing in:

                                    MODE n

                       with n being the number from 1 to 4 as explained
                       below.




                                                                                67
Chapter 5                                               Colour and Light

Spectrum       MODE 1
Compatible     gives you 24 lines to use, with each line consisting
               of 32 'cells' made up of a pattern of 8 x 8 dots and
MODE
               spaces, like the `A` illustrated later in this chapter.
               Your choice of colours for the PEN and PAPER of
               each 'cell' can be made from 16'paint pots' selected
               from a range of 128 colours. Each screen will consist
               of 768 character cells. This is the screen MODE used
               by the Spectrum computer, so Spectrum users can
               feel at home simply by [ENTER]ing MODE 1 for
               using their games library. The SAM Coupé will
               examine their software with the conversion utility
               included on the 'FLASH! 'demonstration cassette.

Alternative    MODE 2
`cells`        offers 192 lines with 32 cells each, giving a total of
               6144 character cells of 8 x 1 dots, with colour selec-
               tions the same as in MODE 1.

Utility MODE   MODE 3
               allows up to 85 columns of characters, which is
               especially useful for applications like word-proc-
               essing. Only four colours are used. MODE 3
               doesn't use cells at all, but lets you use the individ-
               ual dots or 'pixels'. You are given 192 lines with
               each line having 512 pixels, giving 98304 dots to
               play with. The first time you select MODE 3, the first
               four PALETTE positions are redefined to black,
               blue, red and white. If you switch to another
               MODE, your previous selection of colours is poured
               back into these paint pots, and returning to MODE
               3 sets them back again to whatever was used last in
               this MODE. Of course you can change the pres-
               elected colours to any one of the 128 on offer.

               MODE 4
High           is the SAM Coupé`s favourite, and is selected every
               time you switch on. There are 192 lines of 256 pixels
resolution




                                                                         68
Chapter 5                                           Colour and Light

            each, and you can use 16 colours out of the range of
            128 over the 49252 dots on screen. There is a way
            to use all 128 colours on screen at once, which is
            explained later!

            Because everything on a screen can alter instantly
            as the PALETTE is changed, some spectacular ef-
            fects are easily achieved, as the demonstration
            programs on your 'FLASH' cassette prove.

            Experiment with a few lines of coloured text in each
            MODE. Now try out two special settings that can be
            used in MODEs 1 and 2 only. PEN 16 or PAPER 16
            means 'transparent', and PEN 17 or PAPER 17
             means 'contrast'.

            Here is a summary of the SAM Coupé`s four screen
            MODEs:

            MODE 1
            32 cells * 24 lines = 768 character cells, each cell has
             individual choice of PEN and PAPER colour.
            256 * 192 pixels, choice of any 16 screen colours from
            128.

            MODE 2
            32 cells * 192 lines = 5,444 cells, each cell has
            individual choice of PEN and PAPER colour.
            256 * 192 pixels, choice of any 16 screen colours
            from 128.

            MODE 3
            512 pixels * 192 lines
            each pixel has individual choice of colour, choice of
            any 4 screen colours from 128.

            MODE 4
            256 pixels * 192 lines
            each pixel has individual choice of colour, choice
            of any 16 screen colours from 128.




                                                                       69
Chapter 5                                           Colour and Light

Attributes   These attributes are not just limited to PEN and
             PAPER. You can create a series of special effects by
             using two more attribute controls called BRIGHT
             and FLASH.

             If you want to make a colour more brilliant, BRIGHT
BRIGHT       1 turns the instruction on, and BRIGHT 0 sets the
             colour back to normal. There is a special setting
             using BRIGHT 8 or BRIGHT 16, which means
             `transparent': in other words, the brightness on the
             screen is to be left unchanged when a character is
             printed there.

             The FLASH instruction works in MODES 1 and 2
FLASH        only. This particular attribute of a given colour
             makes it appear to FLASH rhythmically. FLASH 1
             turns it on, and FLASH 0 turns it off. FLASH 8 or 16
             sets a `transparent` state that is left unchanged at any
             character position.

             Whenever a character appears on the screen, it
             appears as a pattern of coloured dots chosen by
             your PEN on a background colour chosen by your
             choice of PAPER. So when you press the [SHIFT]
             and [A] keys together the symbol for a capital `A`
             may appear as the pattern of dots in the left hand
             diagram:




                                                                        70
Chapter 5                                           Colour and Light

[INV] key   Now look at the right hand diagram. By pressing the
            [INV]erse key before [SHIFT] [A] the pattern of dots
            is reversed, with the PEN colour becoming what-
            ever the PAPER colour was and vice versa.

INVERSE     There is also an INVERSE command, used to cause
            characters that follow it to be printed as PAPER
            colour on a background of PEN colour. This is set
            by INVERSE 1, and turned off by INVERSE 0.

OVER        OVER is a statement for controlling the pattern of
            graphic dots on the screen, and causes a sort of
            OVERprinting of points, lines and characters. OVER
            1 turns the effect on, and OVER 0 turns it off. In
            MODEs 1 and 2 a character is repeatedly printed
            over itself in a rapid sequence that goes character/
            blank/character. In MODEs 3 and 4 the sequence
            is character/colour/character, the usual colou rbeing
            black. Other effects can be created when used with
            DRAW, CIRCLE, PLOT and PUT, which are exam-
            ined in Chapter 6.

            POINT x,y
            If you want to find out the status or colour of a
            graphic dot or 'pixel' anywhere on the screen, you
            can use the function POINT which is explained in
            the Glossary.




            Finally, here is a summary of all the ways you can
            use your PALETTE:

            PALETTE
            stops all changes to the colours you can use and
            resets the original colours.

            PALETTE position, colour
            sets the position of the `paint pots' on your PAL-
            ETTE to any colour you want. There are sixteen
            different positions (0 to 15) and 128 different colours




                                                                      71
Chapter 5                                                     Colour and Light

                       available (0 to 127), so that:

                                      PALETTE 14, 43: BORDER 14

                       will pour shocking pink paint into paint pot number
                       14, and display it on your screen.

                       PALETTE position, colour a, colour b
                       lets you choose two different colours to appear
                       at the same palette position and swaps between them
                       three times every second. You can create flashing
                       special effects by using this command, for example,
                       pour multi-coloured flashing paint into pot number
                       7 on your PALETTE with:

                                      PALETTE 7,8,36

                       PALETTE position, colour, LINE y
                       is a command that sets a temporary palette position
                       and colour when the y axis of the graphics coordi-
                       nates system of a specified LINE on the screen is
                       reached. The new setting continues to operate until
                       the bottom of the screen, unless another setting is
                       chosen. This is a way of displaying more than
                       sixteen colours on one screen.

                       PALETTE position, colour a, colour b, LINE y
                       is a command that lets you choose temporary alter-
                       native flashing colour, at a given y coordinate with
                       a maximum of 127 changes per screen.

                       PALETTE position LINE y
                       deletes any colour change that would affect PAL-
                       ETTE position p at line y.
“She comes in
Colours every-
Where, she’s like
A rainbow”

(The Rolling Stones)




                                                                              72
Chapter 6
TEXT AND
GRAPHICS
    graphic commands
    PLOT, DRAW, CIRCLE, FILL
    FATPIX and graphics scaling
    SCREENSs
    WINDOW, GRAB, and PUT
    animation
    INKEY$ and GET
    the character set
    CSIZE, TAB, AT
    BLOCK graphics
    user define graphics




“The difficulty is
not to mean
what you write,
but write what
you mean.”

   (Robert Louis
      Stevenson)

“Art is a lie.”
   (Pablo Picasso)



                                  73
Chapter 6                                          Text and Graphics
              This chapter explains how to use the advantages of
              your computer for manipulating written text and
              graphic images. Old-fashioned typewriters use
              keys to print out pre-set characters, and more modern
              machines allow you to swap between a series of
              factory-made typefaces. But with the SAM Coupé
              you can make most keys give you any symbol you
              want, as well as use them for drawing complex
              pictures.

              There is a whole host of special comands for creat-
              ing shapes, patterns and works of art. We have
              included some very simple, but highly effective
              graphics routines on your `FLASH' demonstration
              cassette, and you are welcome to use your [ESC]
              key or [BREAK] button to help examine their list-
              ings.




              PLOT x,y
THE GRAPHIC   is a statement used for pinpointing a graphic start
COMMANDS      position on your screen. This graphic process
              begins wherever you instruct the first picture ele-
              ment (pixel) to be located. It's done by typing PLOT
              followed by two numbers. The first number is the
              x coordinate, which tells the pixel how far it must be
              from the left hand side of your screen, and the
              second number is the y coordinate, saying how far
              it is from the bottom of the screen. So that

                           PLOT 128,86

              will target a spot near the centre of your screen in
              MODES 1, 2 or 4, or left of centre in MODE 3. You
              can pick a colour before using PLOT, so try giving
              your computer red measles with this program in
              MODE 4:




                                                                       74
Chapter 6                                       Text and Graphics
                        10 PLOT PEN 10; INT (RND*255),
                      INT (RND* 173)• GO TO 10


            DRAW x,y
DRAWing     Spots are all very well, but individual pixels are
            easily manipulated into lines. DRAW is used to
            draw a line relative to wherever you are on the
            screen. The value of x is the number of pixels to be
            moved to the right, and y determines the number of
            pixels to be moved upwards. If you want to move
            to the left or downwards, simply give x or y a
            negative value.

            DRAW x,y,z
            works in the same way, but by adding the angle z,
            the line is turned and becomes a curve.

            DRAW TO x,y
            is the command for drawing an absolute line from
            the current position to the point x,y. You can use
            PAPER, PEN, OVER, etc. after DRAW TO (and after
            DRAW, PLOT and CIRCLE commands). The fol-
            lowing example draws random lines that never go
            off screen:

                         10 FOR n-1 TO 100
                         20 DRAW TO RND*255,RND*173
                         30 NEXT n

            DRAW TO x,y,z,
            draws an absolute line from your current position to
            the coordinates x,y, while creating a curve by
            turning through the angle z. Draw a smile like this:

                         10 PLOT 90,86
                         20 DRAW TO 166,86,2

            Leave the smile on your screen, and draw a
            circle round it.




                                                                   75
Chapter 6                                         Text and Graphics


            CIRCLE x,y,radius
            draws a circle on the screen, when it is followed by
            the position of the centre of the circle on screen (the
            x, y coordinates) and the radius of the circle. Now
            surround the smile with:

                          CIRCLE 128,100,50

            If larger circles go far enough off the top or bottom
            of the screen, they will wrap around to the opposite
            edge of the screen

            .
FILLing     FILL colour,x,y
            is a graphics command for FILLing any enclosed
            shape with one colour. Colours are specified by
            using their code numbers, and the target area is
            specified by pinpointing anywhere within the
            boundary area to be FILLed by the usual x, y coor-
            dinates. So that, leaving your smiling circle on
            screen:

                         FILL PEN 3,128,86: FILL PEN 6,1,1

            fills the shape around the target point, and any
            colour other that the one at x, y acts as the bound-
            ary. Special effects can be created by FILLing with
            patterns held in a string, so that:

                          FILL USING a$,x,y

            will use whatever pattern is specified by a$. The
            most convenient way to scoop up such a pattern is
            to GRAB it from an existing screen, which is ex-
            plained later

            FATPIX
            In graphics MODE 3, the pixels are ‘thin’, only half
            the width used by the other MODEs, because there
            are twice as many of them horizontally. By using
            the command FATPIX 1 you can double the width
            of MODE 3 pixels, making vertical lines the same




                                                                      76
Chapter 6                                         Text and Graphics
            thickness as horizontal lines and thin circles truly
            circular. To get back to the normal `thin' state of
            affairs use FATPIX 0, which doubles the x-axis
            range in MODE 3. We can now examine ways of
            manipulating the x-axis and y-axis.

            The scale and origins used by the PLOT, DRAW,
            DRAW TO, CIRCLE, GET and FILL commands
            can be changed, using four special variables.
            XOS controls the x axis off-set of the graphic origin
            YOS controls the y axis off-set
            XRG controls the x axis range
            YRG controls the y axis range
            The off-sets have a value of 0 unless they are used
             with a LET statement, as in:

                         LET XOS=128,YOS=69

            which moves the origin of all graphics coordinates
            to the centre of the screen. Similarly, changing XRG
            and YRG alters the scale to which PLOT and DRAW
            work. Combined with a WINDOW you can even
            create split-screen special effects.

            Normally, position 0,0 of the x,y coordinates is at
            the lower left-hand corner of the screen, just above
            the bottom editing section, with coordinates 255,173
            at the top right-hand corner. If `thin' pixels are used
            in MODE 3, the x range is expanded so that the top
            right becomes 511,173. The SAM Coupé also
            allows the area normally allocated for the two
            `editing lines' to be used for PLOTting by:

                         LET XOS=-18 if characters are 9 pixels
                         high, or
                         LET XOS=-16 for those with a height of 8
                         pixels.

            This makes coordinates 0,0 the extreme bottom




                                                                      77
Chapter 6                                        Text and Graphics


            left-hand corner of the screen, and makes 0,191 the
            top left.

            BLITZ a$
BLITZing    is used to execute a string of graphics commands
            very quickly. Although it works in all MODEs, it's
            especially effective in MODE 4. BLITZ responds to
            the special graphics scaling variables XOS and
            YOS, which enable a graphic shape to be BLITZed
            anywhere on screen, and the size of the BLITZed
            shape can be altered by changing the special graphic
            variables XRG and YRG.

USING       When you switch on the SAM Coupé, there is only
SCREENS     one screen available called SCREEN 1. But you
            have access to a total of 16 screens to use in anyway
            that you need.

            SCREEN number
            selects a particular SCREEN for use by BASIC
            commands. Its number must be between 1 and 16,
            and it must first be OPENed like this:

                          OPEN SCREEN 2

            This allows commands like PRINT, PLOT and
            DRAW to use a second SCREEN, leaving SCREEN
            1 intact until it is selected again.

            OPEN SCREEN number, mode
            reserves memory for a screen, when qualified by
            the screen number, followed by the screen MODE.
            The screen number must be between 2 and 16, and
            MODES 1 to 4 can be selected. Each screen retains
            its own MODE, PALETTE details, PRINT positions,
            and so on.

            OPEN SCREEN n,m,0 acts the same as OPEN
            SCREEN n,m

            OPEN SCREEN n,m,1 opens a ‘common’ screen,
            so that if several programs are present in the




                                                                    78
Chapter 6                                                     Text and Graphics


                         machine's memory, they can all use the screen
                         when they are running.

                         CLOSE SCREEN number
                         releases the numbered screen's memory for an-
                         other use. If you CLOSE a screen that doesn't exist,
                         nothing will happen.

                         DISPLAY number
                         alters which screen is being DISPLAYed, but not
                         the screen used by BASIC. One screen can be
                         building up invisibly while another is currently
                         DISPLAYed.

                         DISPLAY or DISPLAY 0 shows the current screen.
                         DISPLAY 1 to DISPLAY 16 shows the required
                         screen number.

                         CLS
“Obedience…              stands for ‘clear screen’, and wipes off the display
A mechanised             file from the screen. CLS or CLS 0 clears the entire
                         screen, whereas CLS 1 clears the current WINDOW
Automation!”             area of a screen only (see WINDOW below). There
              (Shelly)   is a more powerful clearing command.

                         CLS#
                         not only clears the screen, but executes the
                         commands OVER 0: INVERSE 0: FLASH 0: PAPER
                         0: PEN 7: BORDER 0: PALETTE at the same time.

                         Sometimes your screen isn't big enough to show
Scrolling                everything you need, especially if you are produc-
and rolling              ing complex documents and tables. When this
                         happens, the screen displays the question ‘Scroll?’
                         and waits for a response in order to scroll the screen
                         upwards. But you can adjust what you see on the
                         screen in a variety of other ways, either by moving
                         the entire screen display vertically or horizontally,
                         or by moving a particular section of the screen
                         display, known as a WINDOW.




                                                                                  79
Chapter 6                                         Text and Graphics

            SCROLL CLEAR
            disables the ‘Scroll?’ prompt altogether when the
            screen becomes full, and makes the screen SCROLL
            upwards automatically.

            SCROLL RESTORE
            turns the ‘Scroll?’ prompt back on.

            ROLL direction,number of pixels
            moves the picture on your screen and wraps it
            around itself. Movement is controlled by direction
            (1=left, 2=up, 3=right, 4=down), followed by the
            number of pixels to be moved (1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, etc.).

            ROLL direction, pixels,x,y,width,length
            only ROLLS the screen section designated by x,y
            coordinates marking the top-left corner, followed
            by the number of pixels wide and the number of
            pixels long. X is rounded to an even coordinate and
            the width is rounded to an even number of pixels.
            This technique only works in MODES 3 and 4.

            SCROLL direction,number of pixels
            works in exactly the same way as ROLL except that
            there is no wrap around effect. Blank background
            replaces the lost data.

            SCROLL direction,pixels,x,y,width,length
            works in exactly the same way as its ROLL counter-
            part, except that there is no wrap around effect.
Windows     A screen window is rather like the picture-within-
            picture on some video recorders, and refers to a
            specified area that is to be manipulated independ-
            ently from the rest of the screen.

            WINDOW left, right, top, bottom
            sets up a text WINDOW. The limits are set by
            designating which left-hand column to use ( 0 or
            above), followed by the right-hand column (usually




                                                                      80
Chapter 6                                          Text and Graphics
            column 31, but this can be up to column 84 in
            MODE 3 with 6-pixel wide characters), followed by
            the top line to be used (0 or above) with the fourth
            number giving the bottom line of the WINDOW. If
            the requested borders are not allowed in the current
            MODE or character size then `Invalid WINDOW is
            reported.

            GRAB a$,x,y,width,length
            stores a screen area to a string, which can be PUT
            somewhere else. The screen area to be GRABbed
            is defined by x,y as the top left-hand corner, fol-
            lowed by its width and then its length in pixels.
            GRAB and PUT only work in MODES 3 and 4, and
            the x coordinate for ‘fat’ pixels is rounded up to an
            even value. For MODE 3's ‘thin’ pixels, the x and y
            values are rounded to a multiple of 4.

            PUT x,y,a$
            Places a stored area on the screen which has already
            been GRABbed. The x coordinate is rounded up to
            an even value. PUT will respond to the following
            commands:

            INVERSE as in INVERSE 1: PUT x,y,b$
            or as in PUT INVERSE 1; x,y,ANY$
            OVER 0 which overwrites whatever is already there
            OVER 1 which gives XOR
            OVER 2 which gives OR
            OVER 3 which gives AND
            but PEN and PAPER will not get a response, so
            you're stuck with the colours that you originally
            GRABbed.

            PUT x,y,a$,n$
masking     allows you to use a second string (which has to be
            the same length as the first string) to act as a graphic:
            ‘mask’, determining which pixels will be used from




                                                                        81
Chapter 6                                                       Text and Graphics

                         the first string. This allows a complex shape to be
                         placed on a background as if it was a cut-out
                         without a border. The `mask' will not respond to
                         OVER, but INVERSE will work perfectly.

                         There is another way of making a ‘mask’, by follow-
                         ing these stages: (1) create the original shape on
                         screen. (2) DRAW a box round it, slightly bigger
                         than the area to be GRABbed. (3) FILL the box with
                         PEN 0, to give it a border of zeros. (4) GRAB the
                         area. (5) FILL the border area with PEN 15, to give
                         a border of ones. (6) PUT the stored area over itself
                         with OVER 1. (7) GRAB the area again. (8) PUT it
                         back using OVER 0, INVERSE 1. (9) GRAB it for the
                         last time to get a useable mask!

                         Movies and videos are really a rapid sequence of
MOVEMENT                 still images, each one a little different from the last.
and                      Computer animation works in exactly the same way
ANIMATION                to fool the eye. The simplest form of animation
                         alternates graphic characters to give an impression
                         of movement, such as:

                                       10 PRINT "\" : PAUSE 3: CLS:

                                          PRINT "-" : PAUSE 3: CLS:

                                          PRINT "\" : PAUSE 3: CLS:

                                          GO TO 10

                         which is supposed to be a propellor. Pathetic isn't
                         it. What is needed is a method to make our graphic
“Cinema is truth         images move around the screen, and to achieve this
twenty-four              we must PRINT them in the right place, then wipe
                         them off and PRINT them at the next position and
times a second”          so on. What we also need is a method of controlling
                         their speed and direction of movement.
     (Jean-Luc Godard)




                                                                                    82
Chapter 6                                                      Text and Graphics

                          The next program creates an animated tapeworm:
“Television? No
Good will come
Of this device                          10 PEN 15: PAPER 0: BORDER 0: CLS
                                        20 LET tail=3: DIM aa(tail):
The world is half                          DIM bb(tail)
Greek and half                          30 LET x=1: LET a=9: LET b=15
Latin”                                  40 PRINT AT a b; PEN 12; "0"
                                        50 LET c=CODE (INKEY$):
           (C.P. Scott)                    IF c<193 OR c>201 THEN GO TO 50
                                        60 IF c=197 THEN CLS: LET x=1
                                        70 LET aa(x)=a: LET bb(x)=b
                                        80 LET a=a+(c>192 AND c<196 AND
                                           a<18)-(c>198 AND c<202 AND a>1)
                                        90 LET b=b-((c=193 OR c=196 OR
                                           C=199) AND b>1) + ((c=195 OR
                                           C=198 OR c=201) AND b<30)
                                       100 IF x<tail THEN LET x=x+1:
                                           GO TO 40
                                       110 IF aa(x)<>a OR bb(x)<>b THEN
                                           GO TO 130
                                       120 GO TO 40
                                       130 LET aa=aa(l): LET bb=bb(l):
                                           LET z-1
                                       140 IF z-tail THEN PRINT AT aa,bb;
                                          " ":GOTO 40
                                       150 LET aa(z)=aa(z+1):
                                          LET bb(z)=bb(z+l): LET z=z+l:
                                          GO TO 140


                          Before you RUN that, try and understand how line
                          20 sets up the length of the tapeworm's tail and how
                          line 40 creates its colour and shape. Line 30 sets up
                          variables for screen coordinates. Lines 50 and 60 get
                          ready to recognise certain key codes, and lines 80
                          and 90 set up 8-way direction controls if certain [F]




                                                                                  83
Chapter 6                                           Text and Graphics

            keys are pressed and their codes recognised. [F4]
            gives West, [F7] North-West, [F8] North, and so on
            clockwise. Line 60 gives [F5] a special function.

            Try controlling the worm's travels by holding down
            various [F] keys. Now change its length by altering
            the variable tail in line 20. The longer it is, the more
            tired it becomes, so don't go much beyond LET
            tail=10. The shorter the worm the faster it moves,
            due to the speed of the PRINTing. Just try LETting
            tail=1. Now alter its colour and shape in line 40.
            Next, take a look at line 140 and see how the space
            between the PRINT quotation marks rubs out the
            last segment as the worm moves along. Finally
            change line 140 so that a full stop gets printed
            instead of a space, and watch the little devil leave a
            slimy trail!

            You will have seen in line 50 of the last example
INKEY$      how the INKEY$ function can be used to read
            which keys are being pressed, if any.

            GET is a way of reading the keyboard without the
            use of [RETURN]. It is like INKEY$, except that
GET         GET waits for a key to be pressed before continu-
            ing. When used with a string variable, GET acts like
            a type-writer, so that:


                          10 DO: GET a$: PRINT a$;: LOOP


            prints keys as you hit them, and you can [SHIFT]
             between upper and lowercase as normal. If GET is
            used with a numeric variable such as GET x, then
            the variable will equal 1 if [1] is pressed, up to 9 if [9]
            is pressed. [A] or [a] has a value of 10, [B] or [b] 11,
            and so on. GET is very useful in menu-driven
            programs.




                                                                          84
Chapter 6                                        Text and Graphics


RECORD      RECORD TO a$
            lets you record graphics commands as strings, so
            they can be executed a lot faster if you BLITZ them.
            While RECORD is on, the following commands will
            be recorded: CIRCLE, CLS, DRAW, DRAW TO,
            OVER, PAUSE, PEN, PLOT (but not PLOT PEN or
            other ‘temporary’ commands).

            RECORD STOP
            turns off the graphics recording. Both RECORD TO
            and RECORD STOP work in any MODE.

            The second part of this Chapter explains how you
HANDLING
            can make the best use of the SAM Coupé`s text-
TEXT        handling facilities.

            Each key has been pre-set to deliver text or graphic
Pre-set
            symbols, and there is a table in the Appendix that
Keys        shows what happens when you press each key
            using the following alternatives:

            NORMAL simply pressing the key on its own.
            [SHIFT] which is the same as pressing the [CAPS
            SHIFT] key on a typewriter or wordprocessor to
            give capital letters.
            [SYMBOL] resulting in a series of alternative charac-
            ters, graphic blocks or codes.
            [CNTRL] which is a ‘control’ status, providing some
            specialised codes direct from the keyboard, as well
            as alternative graphic blocks.

            Advanced programmers can make use of the key-
            board ‘map’ in the Appendix, which shows the
            special number codes allocated to each key to
            indicate their position, but we don't want: you to
            confuse these with the SAM Coupé`s system for
            coding all the alpha-numeric and symbol chacac-




                                                                    85
Chapter 6                                            Text and Graphics

                ters. The command KEY position, x is explained
                in the Glossary.

                You've got access to 256 possible characters, each
Character Set   one with a code between 0 and 255. All the codes
                below 32 are used for special purposes, like con-
                trolling inverse video, and characters 32 to 168
                have been predefined on your SAM Coupé. If you
                want to take a look at them now, RUN this small
                program:

                             10 FOR a=32 TO 168: PRINT CHR$ a;:
                             NEXT a

                You can try that again, when you understand how
                to turn the special BLOCKS of graphics on and off,
                but for the time being, if you want to discover
                individual character codes, try:

                             20 FOR a=32 TO 168:
                             PRINT CHR$ a; " =";a: NEXT a

                Another technique available for advanced program-
                mers is the ability to define shorthand codes that can
                be automatically expanded when they get called up
                from your keyboard. The command DEF KEY-
                CODE is also explained in the Glossary.

                Anyone writing a novel, making a shopping list or
                cataloguing their record collection can use the SAM
                Coupé as a video typewriter, and there are several
                features on-board to help in the presentation of text.

                Decide which of the screen MODEs is best suited
                for the particular document you want to write, and
                then experiment with the size and shape of the
                characters you can print using this command:
Character                    CSIZE width, height
size
                which instructs the computer to change the size of
                the characters on screen to x pixels wide by y pixels
                high. In MODE 3 your characters can be either 6 or




                                                                         86
Chapter 6                                        Text and Graphics


             8 pixels wide, and you can adjust their height in any
             MODE from a squashed 6 pixels to a very stretched
             32 pixels high, for use with headlines, early-learn-
             ing displays or special needs. Any character height
             specified as being 16 or more results in genuine
             double height characters, rather than normal char-
             acters on widely spaced lines.

             If you want to make your text look neat by indenting
TABulating   paragraphs, or need to create orderly columns of
             words and numbers, there is a built-in TABulation
             facility ready to help. TABs are set by the usual
             method used by typewriters and wordprocessors,
             and each column is defined by its position from
             the left-hand edge of the screen using the PRINT state-
             ment. For example:
                         PRINT TAB 2;"Sam"
             will indent sam by two spaces in MODE 1, whereas:
                         PRINT TAB 82;"1"
             is allowed if you are using MODE 3 with characters
             6 pixels wide, because TAB 84 is the right-hand
             column.
             Don't forget that the use of a comma in your listing
             will cause the PRINT statement that follows it to be
             automatically tabulated by 16 columns. Its effect
             depends on the MODE you happen to be in, with
             TABs at the centre or left-hand side of the screen in
             MODES 1, 2 and 4 with ‘normal’ sized characters,
             and all sorts of permutations in MODE 3.

AT           AT tells the computer where to PRINT anywhere on
             the screen, when qualified by a line number, fol-
             lowed by a column number. So that in screen
             MODE 4:
                         PRINT AT 10,16;"!"
             PRINTs an exclamation mark near the centre of the




                                                                       87
Chapter 6                                         Text and Graphics

            screen at line 10, column 16.

            If you are not satisfied with the choice of pre-set
            characters in the computer's memory, there is plenty
            of scope to change them to your own needs, or to
            invent completely new designs. These special
            character positions have been allocated for your
            use in a group of user-defined characters. First, let's
            look at the group of 16 mosaic-shapes, known as
            block graphics.

            These are called up by pressing keys [1] to [8] at the
            same time as the [SYMB] or [CNTRL] keys, as
            shown in the chart opposite, and can be used to
            build up diagrams and simple images in a pattern of
            several characters PRINTed together.

            Block graphics are made up from a pattern of pixels
            in exactly the same way as normal characters, as
            described in Chapter 5, and they can be turned on
            and off at will.

BLOCKS      BLOCKS 0
            turns off the predefined block graphics in the chart,
            allocated from CHR$ 128 to 143, and frees up those
            characters for you to redesign as ‘user defined
            graphics’, or UDGs for short. When you type
            BLOCKS 0 and take a look at them by PRINTing
            their CHR$, you will discover that they have already
            been redesigned as foreign characters.


            BLOCKS 1
            turns the original block graphics back on again, but
            your redesigned UDGs are kept safe for later use,
            every time BLOCKS 0 is used.




                                                                      88
Chapter 6                                           Text and Graphics


Block
Graphics
Chart




              CHR$ 144 to 168 are also foreign character UDGs,
User Define   and CHR$ 169 to 255 are available as UDGs for
Graphics      advanced users. You can find the address of any
              user defined character with UDG. So that

                           UDG "A"

              will give the address of the character pattern for A in
              the main character set, and if the upper range of
              UDGs has been set up, then UDG CHR$ 170 etc.
              will work.




                                                                        89
Chapter 6                                           Text and Graphics

            To store your own pattern for a home-made charac-
            ter, you will need to tell the computer how the
            character ‘cell’ is to be represented, by a grid repre-
            senting every pixel that makes up that character. If
            you understand the concept of ‘binary’ numbers,
            this is easy, and if you don't, it is not too difficult. A
            pixel that is to be filled by the current PEN colour is
            represented by a 1, and a pixel that has nothing in
            it except the current PAPER colour is represented
            by a 0. Take a look at the following pair of UDGs.




            We have chosen a simple 8 x 8 pixel grid from
            MODE 1, but the character cell will vary depending
            on MODE and CSIZE. Once you know what your
            own UDG should look like, choose an existing
            character that is available for you to overwrite, and
            store its new pattern in BINary code. The smiling
            face graphic would be written as BIN, followed by
            these numbers representing PEN and PAPER:

                          BIN 00111100
                          BIN 01111110
                          BIN 10011001
                          BIN 11111111
                          BIN 10111101
                          BIN 11000011
                          BIN 01100110
                          BIN 00111100




                                                                         90
Chapter 6                                                 Text and Graphics

                    Now see if you can write out the equivalent numeric
                    pattern for the musical UDG in our example. These
                    numeric patterns can now be POKEd into memory,
                    and the correct address will be UDG "chosen
                    character" for the first byte (or group of eight
                    digits), followed by UDG "chosen character"+1
                    for the next group, down to UDG "chosen charac-
                    ter"+7 in our example. Please see Chapter 10,
                    regarding PEEKing and POKEing.


                    Don't forget that you can change the PEN and
                    PAPER colour for any UDG, so if you redefine a
                    block graphic as a checkerboard pattern of alternate
                    0s and 1s, any two colours can be effectively mixed
                    together!


                    We are very pleased to include a full range of
                    options for several different type ‘fonts’ (as well as
                    a user defined character set that you can customise)
                    in our ‘FLASH’ demonstration cassette. You will be
                    able to use the whole range of graphic options
                    included in this art package for your own programs,
                    and the 'FLASH' instruction booklet will introduce
                    you to all the possibilities of computer art using your
                    SAM Coupé.




“Let no one say I
Have said noth-
ing new;
the arrangement
of the subject is
new”
         (Pascal)




                                                                              91
This page was blank in the original manual




                                             92
Chapter 7
MAKING
MUSIC

    BEEP
    hitting the right note
    frequencies and shortcuts
    volume and stereo
    SAM Coupé and sampler
    the wonders of MIDI




“Music has
charms to soothe
the savage
beast, to soften
rocks, or bend a
knotted oak.”
   (William Congreve)


“Doobie-doobie-
doo…”
  (Frank Sinatra)




                                93
Chapter 7                                                 Making Music
            The Sam Coupé, is an excellent music synthesiser! If
            you are using the UHF TV aerial socket, sounds are
            relayed through your television speaker in mono. A
            stereo signal is available via the SCART socket at the
            back of your machine, or you can enjoy top quality
            sound by connecting a hi-fi system to the light-pen/
            stereo socket outlet and use personal headphones
            if you want privacy.

            BEEP d,p
BEEP
            The computer is instructed to produce a sound by
            typing in the command BEEP followed by two
            numbers, representing the duration in seconds (d)
            and the pitch (p) of a musical note. See if you are
            wired for sound by typing in the following routine,
            with apologies to Beethoven:
                        BEEP 0.5,0: BEEP 0.5,0: BEEP 0.5,0:
                      BEEP 1.5, -4
            The duration and pitch of those first three notes was
            0.5 (or half a second long) and 0 which is the equiva-
            lent to ‘middle C’ on a piano keyboard. I Higher
            notes are created by making p a positive number up
            to 71 (which is the sort of high frequency that your
            dog will appreciate), and lower notes require a
            negative value all the way down to -60 (which can
            cause a small earthquake given enough
            amplification!) BEEPS can be as short as you like
            but the maximum duration is 16 seconds. Try this:
                         FOR p=60 TO 71: BEEP.3,p: NEXT p
            The following diagram shows all the BEEP pitch
            values that are equivalent to the black and white
            musical notes on a grand piano, along with their
            musical notation.




                                                                     94
Chapter 7                                   Making Music
                        BEEP PITCH VALUES




     “I played Mozart
     last night…
     Mozart lost!”
         (Les Dawson)




                                                      95
Chapter 7                                                  Making Music
              If you want to use more complex scales for special
              effects or certain types of oriental music, smaller
              intervals are allowed such as:
                           BEEP 1,0.5
              which will give a quartertone above middle C.
Frequencies   The computer has an eight octave output frequency
              range from 31Hz to 7.81kHz and for specialist
              notation, using frequencies in cycles per second,
              frequency can be calculated by typing in the follow-
              ing formula, where P equals pitch:

                           PRINT 440*2 (P-9)/12

Shortcuts     There is no need to re-type your musical creations
              every time you want to fine-tune your computer to
              other musical instruments, or change the key of
              anything you have written. For instant key and
              timing changes, simply setup variables for duration
              and pitch before typing in your music. Now try this
              example:

                          10 LET d=1
                          20 LET p=0
                          30 BEEP d, p+4: BEEP d, p+4: BEEP d,
                          p+5: BEEP d, p+7: BEEP d, p+7: BEEP
                          d, p+5: BEEP d, p+4: BEEP d, p+2:
                          BEEP d,p: BEEP d,p: BEEP d,p+2: BEEP
                          d, p+4: BEEP d, p+4: BEEP d, p+2:
                          BEEP d, p+2

              If p has a value of 0, that piece of Beethoven will
              play in the key of C-major, but by LETting p=7 for
              example, the entire piece is transposed to the key of
              G. The bad news is that the ‘Ode to joy’ sounds
              more like a funeral march because it is much too
              slow. The good new is that the tempo can be
              changed just as easily as pitch by LETting d=0.5 for
              example.




                                                                      96
Chapter 7                                                           Making Music
                       You can also use d as a shorthand method for
                       writing exact note values, no matter what tempo
                       you select. So if d represents a whole note taking up
                       four beats to the bar, then:

                       d      =       four beats

                       d/2    =       two beats

                       d/4    =       one beat

                       d/8    =       one half beat, and so on.


                       To create silent notes or ‘rests’ in your music, the
                       PAUSE command is used, just as in graphic PAUSEs.
                       Because there are six separate frequency genera-
                       tors, musical power chords can be produced and
                       two chords can overlap. Each frequency generator
                       can produce 256 tones in every octave so that
                       different musical instruments and special effects
                       carn be synthesised. The 'FLASH' demo cassette
                       provides an excellent introduction to the audio
                       aspects of your computer, and the Technical Man-
                       ual contains full details on how to address and
                       control the machine's sound chip, as well as writing
                       data bytes to the MIDI ports.

The wonders            MIDI stands for Musical Instrument Digital Inter-
Of MIDI                face and you can control a whole electronic orches-
                       tra, just by pumping information through the MIDI
                       sockets at the back of your computer. Because
                       MIDI is a world standard, there are thousands of
                       manufacturers producing different lumps of musi-
“Music is best         cal kit that can all synchronise and play together
understood by          through the computer. The SAM Coupé handles
                       this data at the international standard rate of
children and           31.25Kbaud, (31,250 bits of information every sec-
animal”                ond) receiving it through the MIDI-IN port and
   (Igor Stravinsky)   transmitting it via its MIDI-OUT socket.




                                                                               97
Chapter 7                                                            Making Music

                         So the computer not only creates its own music, but
                         thanks to MIDI you can use it to memorise, syn-
                         chronise, learn, teach and control the musical
                         wonders of piano keyboards, synthesisers, sam-
                         plers, rhythm machines, special effects processors,
                         audio-video units, real-time music clocks and dedi-
                         cated sequencers. Of course, the SAM Coupé will
                         also perform as any one of these items itself!

                         The next Chapter explains how to use the sound
                         chip to create sound effects, and the use of volume
                         and stereo.




“Is this plugged
In ?”
        (Bruce Gordon)




                                                                               98
Chapter 8
SOUND
EFFECTS

    sound effects in programs
    ZAP, POW, ZOOM, BOOM
    stereo and multi-channels




“Noise is the most
Impertinent of
All forms of
Interruption.”
   (Schopenhauer)




                                99
Chapter 8                                                               Sound Effects

                        The SAM Coupé is capable of producing wonderful
                        sound effects which can enhance computer pro-
                        grams in any way you choose. They can create at-
                        mosphere, act as markers, add realism, soothe,
                        shock and bring comic relief.
                        Sound effects often use mixed frequencies. Their
                        manipulation is not eay to undrstand, but to start
Pre-Set
                        you off we have pre-programmed some special
Sounds                  comic-strip effects that can be summoned and used
                        in your programs simply by calling up their names,
                        just as if they were ordinary commands.

                        ZAP
                        is exactly what it sounds like, the noise of a bellig-
                        erent laser beam.
                        POW
                        provides an impact effect, a bit like dry flesh hitting
                        wet fish.
                        ZOOM
“Awophop-               Call be used to illustrate fast movement of anything
                        from a jet plane to a skateboard.
aloobop
Alopbam-                BOOM
boom!”                  is what happens when bombs, stock markets and
     (Little Richard)   gluttons explode.



                        Advanced programmers can use the command
                        SOUND to send special codes to the sound chip. It
                        routes data bytes d to individual sound chip Regis-
                        ters r, and up to 127 pairs of such numbers can be
                        used, like this:
                                      SOUND r, d; r, d etc
                        Full details are to be found in the Technical Manual,
                        but beginners in BASIC are welcome to cheat by
                        copying in the following soundtrack. First, let me




                                                                                  100
Chapter 8                                                 Sound Effects


            set the scene. All is dark. An old steam locomotive
            moves from the West towards the dawn. Suddenly,
            a tourist flying saucer passes overhead, on its way to
            Alpha Centauri for breakfast. But the crew have
            forgotten to pick up one of the younger extra-
            terrestrials, who tries to catch up on her sonic
            scooter, and fails. Luckily, there is a public tele-
            phone nearby, and the wee alien calls home, revers-
            ing the charges. The first cuckoo of spring is heard!



                          10 REM sound effects
                          20 GO SUB 3000
                          30 REM steam locomotive
                          40 LET L=7: GO SUB 2000
                          50 LET p=20: GO SUB 1000
                          100 REM flying saucer
                          110 LET L=3: GO SUB 2000
                          120 LET p=20: GO SUB 1000
                          200 REM sonic scooter
                          210 SOUND 17, 4: SOUND 16, 64
                          220 LET p=5: GO SUB 1000:
                          PAUSE 200
                          300 REM telephone
                          310 GO SUB 3000
                          320 LET L=7: GO SUB 2000
                          330 FOR n=0 TO 3
                          340 SOUND 2,255: PAUSE 18
                          350 SOUND 2,0: PAUSE 8
                          360 SOUND 2, 255: PAUSE 18
                          370 SOUND 2, 0: PAUSE 80
                          380 NEXT n
                          400 REM cuckoo
                          410 BEEP 0.2, 19: BEEP 0.4, 15
                          420 STOP
                          1000 REM stereo heft to Right
                          1010 LET a=0: LET b=0




                                                                     101
Chapter 8                                               Sound Effects


                      1020 LET L=1: LET R=0: GO SUB 1500
                      1030 LET L=0: LET R=16: GO SUB 1500
                      1040 LET L= -1: LET R=0: GO SUB 1500
                      1050 LET L=0: LET R= -16:
                      GO SUB 1500
                      1060 RETURN
                      1500 REM output subroutine
                      1510 SOUND 2, (a+b): PAUSE p
                      1520 FOR n=1 TO 15
                      1530 LET a=a+L: LET b=b+R
                      1540 SOUND 2, (a+b)
                      1550 PAUSE p: NEXT n
                      1560 RETURN
                      2000 REM output sound data
                      2010 DATA 9, 64, 16,16,17, 0, 24,138,
                      28, 1, 21, 4, 20, 0
                      2020 DATA 9, 255, 17, 1, 20, 4
                      2030 DATA 24,142, 20, 4, 10,111, 17,
                      6, 9, 128, 16, 32, 28, 1
                      2040 FOR n=1 TO L
                      2050 READ a, d: SOUND a, d: NEXT n
                      2060 RETURN
                      3000 REM clear the sound
                      3010 FOR n=0 TO 31: SOUND n, 0:
                      NEXT n
                      3020 RETURN



            The experts among you can detect that stereo and
            volume are one and the same thing, and that a value
            of 0 represents silence, all the way up to 16 for
            maximum noise. By changing volume levels over
            two channels, the stereo effect is created. See if you
            can locate which SOUND instructions control which
            effect, and alter their codes.




                                                                     102
Chapter 9
EXPANDING
THE SYSTEM

   the Euroconnector
   using a printer
   LPRINT and LIST
   DUMP
   the SCART socket
   joysticks
   of mice and men
   light pens




“Tis pleasant,
Sure, to see one`s
Name in print.”
      (Lord Byron)




                       103
Chapter 9                                   Expanding the System
               One of the main design philosophies behind the
               SAM Coupé has been to build in as many features as
               we can that will allow you to expand your system
               and to upgrade the computer when new products
               come onto the market. So the machine will not fall
               out of step with innovations, because it's ready and
               waiting for the future!

               The last two Chapters explained how the computer
               works with music and sound generators. This
               Chapter deals with the many other devices that can
               he linked to the machine, and the following Chap-
               ters deal with additional memory and communicat-
               ing with other computers and networks.

EXPANSION      The SAM Coupé’s main expansion connector is the
CONNECTOR      64-pin Euroconnector at the back of the machine. It
               is capable of sending power to other devices, and
               handling data, colour and sound signals. The func-
               tion of each pin is set out in a table that can be
               referred to in the Appendix. This is the socket that
               accepts devices such as PRINTERS, SCANNERS
               and VIDEO DIGITISERS.

SCART SOCKET   This 21 -pin socket can handle superb quality video
               as well as full-stereo audio outputs from the SAM
               Coupé, which results in better audio-visuals than
               normal composite signals output from the UHF
               socket to a television aerial input. With the SCART
               socket, the red, blue and green components of the
               video display are handled separately and synchroni-
               sed, and the audio signals are delivered as separate
               left-hand and right-hand channels. This is particu-
               larly useful when using monitors, video digitisers
               and professional audio-visual recording equipment.
               The function of each pin is set out in the Appendix.




                                                                      104
Chapter 9                                             Expanding the System

JOYSTICK                One of the simplest and cheapest add-ons for your
                        computer system is used to control movement and
                        action in game-playing. A JOYSTICK allows very
                        fast reactions to be achieved by manipulating a
                        short lever, tracker-ball or steering device, which
                        acts in the same way as the cursor controls with the
                        additional facility of an action controller or ‘fire’
                         button. Although the joystick port is a standard 9-
                        pin Atari-type, two players can each have their own
                        joystick control because an extra strobe line and
                        power line has been included. This will accept a
                        special MGT plug-socket adaptor, for dual joystick
                        control.

MOUSE                   This little beast is connected to the mouse hole at the
                        back of the SAM Coupé, and is used to control a
                        screen cursor by sliding it over a non-slip flat surface
                        or special mouse mat. Various on-screen options
“Burn not your          can also be selected by clicking buttons or tracker-
House to fright         balls built in to the mouse. The position of the
Away the mice.”         mouse coordinates can be read by using the function
                        XMOUSE to find its x coordinate, and YMOUSE to
                        discover the current y coordinate. The status of a
      (Thomas Fuller)   mouse button from 1 to 3 can be revealed by the
                        function BUTTON n. Please see Glossary for de-
                        tails.

LIGHT PEN               This device is used to communicate directly with
                        the screen, by physically pinpointing x and y coor-
                        dinates with a so-called beam of light. It is espe-
                        cially useful when used with graphic art packages,
                        and often operates with a 'graphics tablet' scratch
                        pad. The light pen coordinates can be read by using
                        the functions XPEN and YPEN to show the x and y
                        coordinates.

Using a Printer         To use the SAM Coupé as an effective word process-
                        sor, or simply to PRINT out computer programs and




                                                                                   105
Chapter 9                                  Expanding the System
             screen images onto paper as `hard copy', you will
             need one of the many printers that are commercially
             available. The most common kind (and usually the
             cheapest) is called a DOT MATRIX PRINTER,
             which uses a tiny grid of pins to strike a type ribbon
             and produce a pattern of dots. These patterns are
             similar to the grids of pixels that make up characters
             on screen, and they can be as flexible and numerous
             as anything you create on screen. DAISY WHEEL
             PRINTERS use a ribbed wheel with each `petal' rep-
             resenting a pair of characters, but you have to
             change the wheel every time you want a different
             style of typeface. LASER PRINTERS use a laser
             beam to reproduce character codes sent from the
             computer onto paper.

             Apart from the operating instructions that come
              with your printer, you will need to know how to use
             the following statements:

             The pair of instructions LPRINT and LLIST act in
LPRINT and   exactly the same way as PRINT and LLIST, except
LLIST        that they tell the computer to use the printer instead
             of the television screen.

             You can use TAB in the same way as described in
             Chapter 6, with AT acting like TAB with printers .

             To print graphic screens onto paper the instruction
DUMP         DUMP is used. Supposing that you've created a
             multicoloured graphic masterpiece that you want to
             keep on paper, but your printer only outputs in
             monochrome. DUMP deals with certain types of
             printer to stop complicated screens turing into gar-
             bage when they get printed out in black and white.
             It can be used in any screen mode, and will result in
             unshaded printed copy like this:

             In MODE1 and 2 all set pixels print out as black.




                                                                      106
Chapter 9                                  Expanding the System
            In MODE 3 and 4 any colour other than PAPER
            prints out as black.

            DUMP will not work with a listing that gets CLEARed.
            In the event of you changing your mind after the
            printer has begun to operate, you can rescue things
            by BREAKing into the program.

            DUMP on its own does a graphics copy of whatever
            is on screen. Unless you tell it otherwise, this will be
            at the normal current width and height of the char-
            acters. If you want to shovel a screenful of text into
            your printer, then use the command DUMP CHR$.

            Experienced users should also note that LPRINT
            works via stream 3, which is normally open to
            channel 'p' (a parallel printer). There is a flexible
            system for translating characters with codes greater
            than 128 into sequences that allow alternative char-
            acter sets to be selected while any of these charac-
            ters is being PRINTed.




                                                                       107
Chapter 9                      Expanding the System


 SAM Coupé   Ready to Expand




                                                108
Chapter 10
MEMORY

   handling memory
   FREE, RAMTOP and MEM$
   OPEN and CLOSE
   machine code
   PEEKing and POKEing
   USR, CALL, CLEAR
   IN and OUT
   using a disk drive




“memory is the
Thing you forget
With”
   (Alexander Chase)




                           109
Chapter 10                                                                            Memory


Available                  The more you write programs, the more you'll
memory                     appreciate that your limitations are not. restricted by
                           imagination or creativity but by your computer's
                           memory. So you must make the best possible use of
                           the large but unforgiving memory provided.

                           Your SAM Coupé has 512 * 1024 bytes of Dynamic
                           Random Access Memory, with 256K already pro-
                           vided for your use. You can double this on-board
                           memory to the full 512K by plugging in two extra
                           memory chips, available from MGT. The simple
                           fitting intructions come with the package.

                           A byte is a unit of storage in memory, which can
Bits and
                           hold a number between 0 and 255, and each byte
Bytes                      has an address which is a number between 0 and
                           528K. Each byte is made up of eight smaller units of
                           memory called bits, and advanced users can refer to
                           the discussion of machine code later in this Chapter.

                           Complex BASIC routines use a surprisingly small
Memory
                           amount of memory, but full colour screens of graph-
gobblers                   ics will gobble up great chunks of the stuff. The
                           largest possible program line can have up to 127
                           individual statements, consuming as many as 16,127
“Truth is the most         bytes, and your arrays can fill every aspect of avail-
                           able memory. Strings can be up to 65520 characters
valuable thing we have.    long. When the computer recognises a command it
Let us economize it.”      only takes the equivalent of one character's storage
            (Mark Twain)   space, whereas all functions are stored as two
                           characters in memory. Other types of information
                           will occupy varying amounts of space.

                           For example, each MIDI data item is made up of 8
MIDI memory                bits (1 byte), plus one bit each for 'start' and 'stop'.
                           Channel voice messages can carry information about
                           the tones being used and the channel number using
                           them, and each message takes up to 3 bytes, plus
                           one bit each for start and stop.




                                                                                          110
Chapter 10                                                          Memory

SCREEN       32K of the Sam Coupé’s memory is dedicated to the
memory       screen. If extra screens are opened, using OPEN
             SCREEN, each one will gobble up another 32K.

Memory       The following functions have been provided to
             help you handle available memory:
functions
             FREE
             instantly informs you how much free memory is
             available for use with your BASIC program and
             its variables. As with other functions, just type
                          PRINT FREE RAMTOP
             starts at 81919 and tells you the top address avail-
             able for use by BASIC, and is set by using the CLEAR
             command, e.g.
                          CLEAR 70000: PRINT RAMTOP
             MEM$ (n TO m)
             assigns a section of memory to a string. You can
             search it with INSTR and POKE it wherever you
             want. The length of the memory `dicer' must be less
             than 65536, both n and m must be included, and n
             can be 0. MEM$ gives you the power to move large
             areas of memory very quickly when used with the
             Sam Coupé’s ability to POKE strings. Another
             valuable use of the MEM$ function is to allow
             rapid searches of memory using INSTRing, and although
             you can search a specified area of rnemor y, the
             searching process is so fast that it may be simpler to
             search through the entire memory. To find every
             location of a particular string you could use:
                          10 LET adr=1
                          20 I.ET adr-INSTR (adr, MEM$ (0 TO
                          65534),a$)
                          30 IF adr< > 0 THEN PRINT adr: LET
                          adr=adr+l: GO TO 20




                                                                        111
Chapter 10                                                                     Memory

                     You could also search and replace a string by
                     using POKE.

                     Full details of memory locations and arrangements
                     can be found in the Technical manual.

Extra                There arc two commands that allow you to reserve
memory               and free up pages of memory.
pages
                     OPEN n
                     reserves n extra memory pages of 16K each for use
                     by BASIC, where. possible. This allows CLEAR to
                     set a higher RAMTOP.

                     CLOSE n
                     frees n 16K pages from use by the BASIC program
                     and variables, but only if RAMTOP allows it. This
                      is because BASIC insists that it keeps all pages up to
                     and including the one where RAMTOP is located.
                     All freed pages can be used for screens, DOS and
                     other programs.



Machine code         Large chunks of memory are saved and programs
                     speeded up if BASIC keywords and routines can be
                     bypassed, and you communicate directly with the
“I never forget a    computer's codes. 'Machine Code' is the set of in-
                     structions that the Sam Coupé’s Z80B microproces-
face, but in         sor chip uses, and you can write programs directly
your case I'll       to it in 'assembly language'. This type of program
make an              has to be coded into a sequence of bytes using an
                     assembler, and there are many ready-made soft-
exception.”          ware packages on the market. If you want to code
    (Groucho Marx)   them yourself there are several excellent books to
                     teach you how, and this isn't one of them.

CODE                 Information can be SAVEd and LOADed in bytes by
                     using the keyword CODE, without any need to
                     define what the purpose of that information is.




                                                                                   112
Chapter 10                                                           Memory
             For example

                           SAVE "name" CODE
                           LOAD "name" CODE or [F8]
             Machine coders will benefit from the following in-
             formation.

             PEEK addr
             is the function that reveals the contents of the ma-
             chine's memory at an address in the range from 0 to
             528K. It returns a result from 0 to 255

             DPEEK addr
             allows a double PEEK, and is the equivalent to
             PEEK addr+256*PEEK (addr+1)

             POKE addr,x
             is used to store a number directly into an address of
POKEing      memory in the range from 0 to 524287. Up to 32
             numbers can be POKEd at once into successive
             addresses, like this:

                          POKE addr, 255, 129, 129, 129, 129,
                       129, 129, 255

             You can POKE strings into memory as well as
             numbers by typing:

                         POKE addr, a$ or, for example, POKE
                       addr, "testing"

             DPOKE addr, value
             allows a double POKE. The value must be in the
             range from 0 to 65535.

             USR n
             is used to run machine code, with the given number
             as the start address. Values from 0 to 52487 can be
             used.

             USR$ addr
             gives the string result of a machine code program at




                                                                         113
Chapter 10                                                           Memory
             a designated address. Machine code should end
              with BC=length, DE=start, A=page of start
             (if DE>=3276$).

             CALL n
             can be used to summon up a particular address with
             a list of numeric or string parameters, if desired.
             E.g.

                          CALL, address,x,y,SAM$
             This is explained in the Technical Manual.

             CLEAR
             is used to free up all of the space in the computer's
             memory occupied by variables, by CLEARing them
             away.

             CLEAR n
             acts like CLEAR, but it alters the system variable
             RAMTOP to a position specified by the number n.
             N must be within the 4 pages allocated to BASIC
             when the computer is switched on, and must be
             <=81919 unless extra pages have been OPENed.


IN and OUT   The computer has 65536 INput/OUTput ports, or
             I/O ports for short, and these are used to commu-
             nicate with internal devices such as the keyboard
             and sound chip, as well as external devices like
             printers. Each port can be controlled with the
             function IN and the statement OUT.
                          IN address
             reads the byte from the addressed port, and gives
             that byte as the result.

                          OUT address, value

             writes a given value (between 0 and 255) to the
             addressed port (between 0 and 65535)




                                                                         114
Chapter 10                                                              Memory

Disk           A choice of one or two ultra-slim disk drive units can
drives         be slid inside the front panel of the SAM Coupé.
               These are removeable consoles, and each one can
               accomodate one megabyte of memory on a 3 5"
               floppy disk, offering 780K per disk after it has been
               formatted for use. Disks offer very fast SAVEing
               and LOADing of programs, and are the most con-
               venient way of storing large quantities of data. And
               if this massive capacity isn't enough, then you can
               connect up to gigantic networks of data as outlined
               in the next Chapter.

               To take full advantage of the extra speed and
Using a disk   memory available with the MGT removeable disk
drive          drives, a few more commands have to be learned.
               First of all the Disk Operating System, DOS for short,
               must be loaded into memory.

               BOOT
               loads DOS from disk, and allows you to use the
               special DOS operations:

               FORMAT, to prepare a new disk for accepting data,
               DIR, which examines the DIRectory of files on disk,
               MOVE, which shuffles files around, and
               ERASE, to wipe out any files you don't need.

               DEVICE
               makes the commands SAVE, LOAD, MERGE and
               VERIFY work with the disk drive, or with a network
               of several computers. Please refer to the Glossary of
               this Manual for details, and rest assured that MGT
               disk drives are accompanied by their own illuminat-
               ing manual!




                                                                            115
This page was blank in the original manual




                                             116
Chapter 11
COMMUNICATIONS


   networks
   education
   streams and channels
   piracy is theft




“Soap and edu-
cation are not as
sudden as a
massacre.”
  (Mark Twain)




                          117
Chapter 11                               COMMUNICATIONS
             One of the most exciting features of your SAM
             Coupé is its ability to communicate with one or
             more similar machines. The MIDI-IN and MIDI-
             OUT connections at the back of the computer are
             ready to be used in setting up this network.

NETWORKS     At its simplest level, there is no need for any sophis-
             ticated equipment or software, because everything
             is built in. Cassette-based systems work very well,
             and you can play multi-user games at two or more
             different locations. The only limit is your own
             imagination! More serious networking is achieved
             by using disk drives and printers, and there arc even
             methods of communicating with other networks all
             over the world.

EDICATION    As a stand-alone machine, the Sam Coupé has been
             designed to excel as an educational computer.
             From primary school to university, its colour, sound
             and add-on facilities offer a complete range of
             options. Early learners and disabled users can take
             advantage of the MGT Mouse for simple control, as
             well as the MGT Light Pen for help with reading.
             The CSIZE command will create instant large-scale
             characters for users with impaired sight.

             As many as 16 machines can be linked up in a
             classroom network, with obvious advantages when
             it comes to sharing the resources of disk drives and
             printers. Data is LOADed to every computer, and
             progress of the whole network can be monitored
             and SAVEd from the teacher's machine. Channel #0
              is normally the 'broadcast' station in an educational
             network, with channels #1 to #15 used for the
             personal operator stations, allocated to the stu-
             dents' computers. There is a wide range of educa-
             tional software for the SAM Coupé, and MGT are
             always happy to talk to parents, teachers and of




                                                                       118
Chapter 11                                COMMUNICATIONS

             course younger SAM Coupé users, who want the
             latest information on educational programs and
             add-ons.

             This next section is a little bit technical, and you can
             skip over it if you wish.

             In a NETWORK, Channel #0 is normally the 'broad-
             cast' station, with Channels #1 to #15 used for
             personal operator channels.

             Streams 0 and 1 are normally OPEN to Channel 'K'.
                           PRINT #0; "testing": PAUSE
             will PRINT at the bottom of the screen, whereas
             PRINT #2 will PRINT on the upper part of the
             screen as usual (using Channel 'S'). PRINT #3 acts
             like LPRINT, using Channel `P`, and you may choose
             to use it like this:
                           OPEN #6; "P": PRINT #6; "hello"
             in order to send output to a printer via Stream #6.

             INPUT #2 is also allowed and can be used to gain
             access to the upper part of the screen as in the
             following example, for typing in a value next to a
             'value' prompt:
                           INPUT #2; "value:"; v
             Unlike the lower screen, the line is left uncleared
             after you press [RETURN].


             The RECORD command works via Stream 16.
             Stream 16 prints to the string variable specified by
             RECORD, and it will continue to do so after a
             RECORD STOP.




                                                                        119
Chapter 11                              COMMUNICATIONS

PIRACY       There's nothing clever about theft. If you make a
             copy of a program as a back-up for your own use,
             that's sensible, but if you steal by making pirate
             copies of commercial games, you hurt the writers
             and manufacturers. Piracy puts up the price of
             software and it can drive people out of business. If
             there is less and less original software produced,
             this harms everyone, including you.

             By using special routines, the Sam Coupé’s BREAK
             button can be used to transfer cassette-based soft-
             ware to disk, for your own convenience. Please
             don't abuse this feature and turn it into a 'public
             convenience'. MGT wants to make it clear that we
             will provide software producers with all the infor-
             mation we have on how to protect games than run
             on the SAM Coupé, and we expect help from re-
             sponsible adults to discourage piracy using our
             products.




                                                                    120
Chapter 12

ERROR
CODES

   spotting mistakes
   error codes and messages
   using ON ERROR




“A life spent
Making mistakes
Is more useful
Than a life spent
Doing nothing”
  (George Bernard
           Shaw




                              121
Chapter 12                                                ERROR CODES
                 When a mistake is made in programming, or when
                 you ask your computer to do the impossible, the
                 Sam Coupé helps you spot the error and explain the
                 problem. This results in special codes automatically
                 appearing at the bottom of your screen to point out
                 what's gone wrong and where the error is.

                 When a programming mistake is encountered,
                 helpful messages arc given in the following order:
                 one of the code numbers and messages listed below
                 telling you exactly what sort of mistake has been
                 made, followed by the line number where the error
                 is lurking, followed by the number of the statement
                 in that line responsible for the foul-up. For ex-
                 ample:

                            5 NEXT without FOR, 700:3

                 tells you that the type of error is code 5 meaning that
                 you have written a NEXT command but forgotten
                 the FOR command, and that the problem is at line
                 700 in statement 3.

                 The code you want to see is 0 which means that
                 everything is OK, but even the most experienced
                 programmer can be expected to make mistakes.
                 Here is a list of all the error codes and their error
                 messages, with explanations of what they mean.


     ERROR CODE ERROR MESSAGE
        NUMBER

              0 OK
                No problems, successful completion, everything is
                OK

              1 Out of memory
                There is not enough room in the computer's
                memory for what you want to do




                                                                           122
Chapter 12                                             ERROR CODES


     ERROR CODE ERROR MESSAGE
        NUMBER
              2 'name of variable' not found
                The computer cannot find a variable, either be-
                cause it has not yet been loaded, not been assigned
                or set up, or you have not set its dimensions

              3 Data has all been read
                You are trying to READ past the end of the existing
                DATA listing.

              4 Subscript wrong
                Either the number of subscripts is wrong or the
                subscript is outside the dimensions of the array.

              5 NEXT without FOR
                Even though there is an ordinary variable with the
                same name, the control variable has not yet been
                set up by a FOR statement.

              6 FOR without NEXT
                Even though there is a FOR loop waiting to run,
                there is no NEXT statement to go with it.

              7 FN without DEF FN
                A user-defined function is missing.

              8 RETURN without GOSUB
                There is a RETURN statement without GOSUB to
                welcome it back.

              9 Missing LOOP
                You have forgotten to follow a DO marker with the
                necessary LOOP.

             10 LOOP without DO
                Even though there is a LOOP waiting to jump back,
                there is no DO to start it off.




                                                                      123
Chapter 12                                             ERROR CODES


     ERROR CODE ERROR MESSAGE
        NUMBER

             11 No POP data
                You are trying to use POP, but there is no data on
                the stack.

             12 Missing DEF PROC
                You want to end a named procedure with END
                PROC, but it is missing. This error can also result
                from a simple spelling mistake, such as `PRUNT'!

             13 No END PROC
                You have forgotten to mark the end of a named
                procedure.

             14 BREAK into program
                BREAK has been hit or [ESC] pressed, in between
                two statements, and the line and statement number
                that are shown refer to the statement before BREAK
                was used. When you CONTINUE, the program
                goes to the statement that follows and allows for any
                program jumps that you have made.

             15 BREAK - CONTINUE to repeat
                BREAK has been hit while a peripheral operation
                was taking place, so when you CONTINUE the last
                statement is repeated.

             16 STOP statement
                When you want to CONTINUE after this, the pro-
                gram will start again at the next statement.

             17 STOP in INPUT
                When you want to CONTINUE after this, the pro-
                gram will start again by repeating the last INPUT
                statement.




                                                                        124
Chapter 12                                              ERROR CODES


     ERROR CODE ERROR MESSAGE
        NUMBER
             18 Invalid file name
                You are trying to SAVE a file but have forgotten to
                give it a name, or the name is longer than 10 char-
                acters.

             19 Loading error
                The file you want to LOAD has been found but there
                is something wrong with it and it refuses to LOAD
                properly or fails to VERIFY. Check your cables, vol-
                ume level, cassette tape and dirty play-back heads
                of the cassette player.

             20 Invalid device
                You are trying to SAVE or LOAD data, but you are
                using the wrong thing for input/output (such as a
                disk drive instead of a cassette recorder), or have
                forgotten to plug it in.

             21 Invalid stream number
                You are trying to use a stream number that is inap-
                propriate. Streams 0 to 16 are the paths to the
                various channels. E.g. '5', 'P', 'K', 'N'.

             22 End of file
                The end of a file has been reached, usually a disk
                file.

             23 Invalid colour
                You have tried to specify a colour with a number
                that is not appropriate. Colours range from 0 to 127.

             24 Invalid palette colour
                The palette's 'paint pots' range from 0 to 15.

             25 Too many palette changes
                The maximum number of PALETTE changes is 127
                per screen.




                                                                        125
Chapter 12                                             ERROR CODES


     ERROR CODE ERROR MESSAGE
        NUMBER
             26 Parameter error
                Either you have used the wrong number of argu-
                ments, or the wrong type of argument, like a num-
                ber instead of a string.

             27 Invalid argument
                You are using an argument that is not suitable for
                the function you want.

             28 Number too large
                Your calculations have resulted in a number that is
                too enormous for the SAM Coupé to handle.

             29 Not understood
                The computer is confused by your (mis)use of
                BASIC.

             30 Integer out of range
                A whole number (called an integer) is required, but
                the argument you are using has been rounded to an
                integer that is outside of a suitable range.

             31 Statement doesn't exist
                The computer can't make a decision or obey an in-
                struction without the necessary statements. For
                example, you may have deleted statements after a
                GO SUB and then [RETURN]ed.

             32 Off screen
                The graphic requirements that you have asked for
                cannot fit on the screen.

             33 No room for line
                There is not enough room in the available memory
                for the line you are trying to insert, or the line
                numbering requested in a RENUM is impossible.




                                                                      126
Chapter 12                                              ERROR CODES


     ERROR CODE ERROR MESSAGE
        NUMBER
             34 Invalid screen mode
                There are four screen modes, numbered 1 to 4.

             35 Invalid BLITZ code
                You have used BLITZ with a string that does not
                contain sensible graphics commands.

             36 Stored area too big
                You cannot fit the area you want to GRAB into store.

             37 Invalid PUT block
                The string that you want to PUT on a screen is not
                a real block of screen data
                .
             38 PUT mask mismatched
                When creating a graphics mask, the second mask-
                ing string must be the same length as the original string.

             39 Missing END IF
                You are using a long IF statement over a number of
                lines and have chosen to omit THEN, but you have
                forgotten to end the statement with END IF.

             40 Invalid variable name
                Your numeric variable name does not start with a
                letter, or is longer than 32 characters. Your string
                and string array variable name does not end with $,
                or is longer than 10 characters.

             41 BASIC stack full
                Please see Chapter 10 for dealing with memory
                stacks.

             42 String too long
                Your string is more than 65520 characters long, or in
                the case of STRING$, only 512 characters are al-
                lowed.




                                                                             127
Chapter 12                                            ERROR CODES


     ERROR CODE ERROR MESSAGE
        NUMBER
             43 Invalid screen number
                When the computer is switched on, there is only
                one screen, numbered 1. You are trying to OPEN a
                screen with a number outside the range 2 to 16.
                This error message also appears if you select a
                screen with the SCREEN or DISPLAY commands
                that has not been OPENed.

             44 Screen is already open
                You are trying to use OPEN SCREEN with a number
                that already exists.

             45 Stream is already open
                You want to open a stream which is already occu-
                pied.

             46 Invalid channel
                You are attempting to use an inappropriate chan-
                nel.

             47 Stream is not open
                You are trying to use a stream number that is
                CLOSEd.

             48 Invalid CLEAR address
                You are trying to CLEAR with a number beyond the
                limits of memory allocated to BASIC.

             49 Invalid note
                The note you want is too high or too low. You must
                stick between the range -60 to 71.

             50 Note too long
                A note must be shorter than 16 seconds, so your
                command must be no greater than BEEP 16.




                                                                     128
Chapter 12                                             ERROR CODES


     ERROR CODE ERROR MESSAGE
        NUMBER
             51 FPC error
                You have made an error in a machine coded float-
                ing point calculation.

             52 Too many definitions
                May be produced by the use of DEF KEYCODE or
                DEF FN.

             53 No DOS
                There is no DOS system to BOOT from disk, or no
                disk.

             54 Invalid WINDOW
                The borders of your WINDOW are not allowed in
                the current MODE and CSIZE.

                 You can lay plans for handling program errors by
                 telling the computer that if an error occurs then it
                 should go to a special error-handling routine. Error
                 trapping is turned on by ON ERROR and is turned
                 off by ON ERROR STOP. When this routine is
                 turned on, some special variables are created, as
                 follows:
                 ERROR (the error code number, as listed above)
                 LINO (the line number where the error is located)
                 STAT (the statementwhere the error is to be found)
                 Experienced users can devise their own error han-
                 dling routines, which must be used within a pro-
                 gram, such as:
                             10 ON ERROR GOTO 100
                 which tells the program to GO TO line 100 if it
                 detects an error, and then execute any instructions
                 placed there, or GO SUB a subroutine. ON ERROR
                 is automatically turned off while you try to correct




                                                                        129
Chapter 12                                              ERROR CODES
                      the error, so if there is another mistake within the
                      error-handling routine it will be handled normally.
                      Subroutines and procedures will return to the state-
                      ment that comes after the rogue that caused the
                      error, when they RETURN or END PROC. Now ON
                      ERROR will activate itself once again, and go hunt-
                      ing for the next mistake.

                      You can use CONTINUE to go back to the state-
                      merit that caused the error, without re-enabling ON
                      ERROR, but if you CONTINUE while the error is
                      'BREAK', then you will go back to the next state-
                      ment. To keep the Basic stack correct, you can use
                      POP to get rid of a RETURN or END PROC address,
                      should you decide to CONTINUE instead of RE
                      TURNing.




“Intelligence isn’t
To make no
Mistakes, but to
See how to make
Them good.”
   (Bertolt Brecht)




                                                                             130
GLOSSARY




“I like short
words and
vulgar fractions”
    (Winston Churchill)




                          131
Glossary



'This section of the User Manual is your reference guide to all the words and
expressions you are likely to need when programming the SAM Coupé. It
includes commands, functions, keywords and definitions of technical terms
and jargon. The easiest way to understand what each of these paragraphs
means is simply to try out the techniques and see what happens. You can't
harm your computer by experimenting.

Keywords that can be used in BASIC programs are printed in bold upper case
letters only, such as AND.

Definitions and jargon are shown in upper and lower case letters, for
example, Array.

Actual keys that can be found on the computer keyboard are represented as
upper case letters enclosed by square brackets, like this [RETURN].

ABS
stands for ABSolute magnitude, and is a function for converting an argument
into a positive number.

ACS
stands for arccosine, and is a function for finding out the value of a number
that has a given cosine.

Address
is the numeric location of a unit of data in the computer's memory.

AND
is used to combine conditions just like in English language, such as:
                IF a$ = “Sam" AND x > 0 THEN PRINT x

ARRAY
An array is a set of variables which are only distinguished from one another
by a number written in brackets after the name of the array. Before an array
can be used, space must be made for it in the computer's memory by using
a dimension statement, the command for which is DIM.




                                                                                132
Glossary

ASCII
stands for American Standard Codes for Information Interchange, and is the
widely-used system of character codes for transferring data between comput-
ers and various peripherals such as printers.

ASN
stands for arcsine, and is the function for finding out the value of a number
that has a given sine.

AT
tells the computer where to PRINT anywhere on the screen, when qualified
by a line number, followed by a column number.

ATN
stands for arctangent, and is a function for finding out the value of a number
that has a given tangent.

Attributes
of a character or graphic block at any given position consist of its colour,
brightness and in MODEs 1 or 2 its flash condition.

AUTO
automatically numbers your program lines. If you enter AUTO by itself, the
computer will take the current line number where the program cursor is, and
add ten at every new line. It will not work if the current line number is less
than 10 or more than 61439. You can skip over a block of line numbers while
using AUTO by deleting the line number provided and typing in your own
line number, followed by the rest of the line. AUTO will carry on from there,
numbering in steps of ten. You can choose your own step values if ten doesn't
suit you.

AUTO                    number after here in steps of 10

AUTO 150                number from line 150 in steps of 10

AUTO 150, 5             number from line 150 in steps of 5

BASIC
stands for Beginners All-purpose Symbolic Code, and is the single most used
computer language in the world. An advanced version of BASIC is built into
the memory of your SAM Coupé.




                                                                                 133
Glossary



BEEP duration,pitch
is the instruction we use to make the computer produce sound.

BIN
is short for binary, and is not a function or a command but more like a gear
change, acting as an alternative notation for numbers. BIN is followed by a
sequence of up to 16 digits made up of is and 0s, each different sequence rep-
resenting a particular number.

BIN$
automatically gives the binary equivalent of a number as an eight character
string if the number is less than 256, or as a sixteen character string if the
number is between 256 and 65535. The following functions are also
available, n BAND m, and n BOR m, which give binary AND, OR.

Bit
is the smallest piece of data which can be represented in a computer's
memory by 1 or 0.

BLITZ a$
is used to execute a string of graphics commands very quickly. It works in all
modes, but is especially effective in mode 4. BLITZ responds to the special
graphics scaling variables XOS and YOS, which enable a graphic shape to be
BI.ITZed anywhere on screen, and the size of the BLITZed shape can be
altered by changing the special graphic variables XRG and YRG.

BLOCKS
turns the block graphic characters on and off. BLOCKS 0 turns the block
graphics off and allows the pre-defined foreign character set CHR$ 128 to 143
to act as user-defined graphics (UDGs). BLOCKS 1 turns the block graphics
back on. Luckily UDGs don't get forgotten and you can call them up again
by using BGRAPHICS 0.

BOOT
loads the Disk Operating System (DOS) from the disk into the computer's
memory.




                                                                                 134
Glossary

BORDER
changes the colour of the screen border to any colour in your palette from 0
to 15. For example, BORDER 6 changes the screen border to yellow.

[BREAK]
when pressed, this button at the back of the machine will interrupt the
program. Programmers can use software techniques to change the function
of this interruption.

BRIGHT
is used to make a chosen colour more brilliant. BRIGHT 1 turns the
instruction on, BRIGHT 0 sets the colour back to normal. There is a special
setting BRIGHT 16, which means 'transparent': in other words, the colour on
the screen is to be left unchanged when a character is printed there.

Bug
is a slang expression that refers to a mistake in a computer program, which
causes problems when the program is RUN.

Buffer
is an area of memory set aside for temporary storage of data.

BUTTON n
shows the status of the MOUSE button, with n being the number of the button
from 1 to 3. When the specified button is pressed, 1 will be displayed, or 0
if it is not pressed. If you make n=0 then 1 is displayed if any or all buttons
are pressed.

Byte
is a unit of memory made up of 8 bits, and is large enough to store one
character or a whole number <= 255.

CALL n
summons up a machine code program at an address with a list of numeric or
string parameters if desired. Please refer to the Technical Manual.

[CAPS] LOCK
the [CAPS] LOCK key causes all key entries to appear in upper case, until it
is disengaged by pressing it again.




                                                                                  135
Glossary

Character set
There are 256 possible characters, each with a code between 0 and 255. The
pre-defined character set can be printed out by:
         10 FOR a = 32 TO 168: PRINT CHR$ a;: NEXT a

CHR$
is applied to a number and it gives the single character string whose code is
that number.

CIRCLE x,y,r
draws a circle on the screen, when it is followed by the position of the centre
of the circle on screen (the x, y coordinates) and the radius of the circle. If
the circle goes far enough off the top or bottom of the screen, it will wrap
around to the opposite edge of the screen.

CLEAR
gets rid of all variables and frees up the space in the computer's memory
which they occupied.

CLEAR n
acts like CLEAR, but alters the system variable RAMTOP to the point
specified by the number..

CLOSE
is used to shut off streams, which are normally OPEN to specified channels.

CLOSE n
frees up n pages of 16k each which are normally used by the BASIC program
and variables, if RAMTOP allows this. After being CLOSEd, the freed pages
can be used for screens, DOS or other programs.

CLOSE SCREEN n
releases a specified screen memory if it already exists, so that its memory can
be used again, e.g.
         CLOSE SCREEN 2




                                                                                  136
Glossary

CLS
stands for 'clear screen', and wipes off the display file from the screen. CLS
or CLS 0 clears the entire screen, whereas CLS 1 clears the current WINDOW
only, and CLS# not only clears the screen, but executes OVER 0: INVERSE
0: FLASH 0: PAPER 0: PEN 7: BORDER 0: PALETTE

CODE
is applied to a string and it gives the code of the first character in the string.
If the string is empty, it gives 0.

Command
is a word or short phrase like OPEN SCREEN, DRAW and GO SUB, used in
a program to instruct the computer to perform a specific task.

Condition
A condition is something that the program has to decide to be true or false
before making a decision, and can be used after EXIT IF, WHILE or UNTIL.
A condition always gives a numeric result, 1 for true or 0 for false (try
PRINTing 2=1).

CONTINUE
instructs the program to begin again after it has been stopped by an error report.

Control Codes
are special characters that do not appear on the screen, but have actions when
PRINTed or PLOTted. When certain codes are called up from the keyboard,
the computer will search to see if there is an expanded definition for them.
See DEF KEYCODE.

COS
when followed by an angle in radians, is the function that calculates the
cosine.

CPS
stands for Characters Per Second, and refers to the theoretical top speed that
a printer can LPRINT on paper.




                                                                                     137
Glossary
Crash
is the slang expression for a computer program blowing its own brains out,
and getting splattered beyond rescue.

CSIZE width,height
lets you change the shape of your characters by squashing them down or
stretching them out. For example, in mode 3
         CSIZE 6, 9
will make all your characters inhabit cells six pixels wide and nine pixels high.
The width can be 6 or 8, and the height can be from 6 to 32 pixels.

[CTRL]
the [CTRL] key is used to change the keyboard into the CONTROL status.

Cursors
are position indicators, usually shown on screen in the form of an inverse
symbol. The EDIT line cursor is represented by an inverse * in the normal
keyboard state, and by an inverse + when [CAPS] lock is engaged. The
current line program cursor is represented by an inverse > symbol.

Cursor keys
are the four directional arrow keys used to move the program cursor around
the screen, as well as to control movement during game-play.

DATA
DATA statements can include keywords like "go to" without them being
changed into tokens. Other than this, words without quotes must be legal
numeric variables. Thus Sam 1 is acceptable, but 1x is not.

Debug
is the slang expression for tracking down programming mistakes, or 'bugs',
and correcting them.

DEFAULT
is used mainly with procedures, and creates a variable only if it does not
already exist.




                                                                                    138
Glossary

DEF FN
is short for user-defined function. Function names can have any length and
must start with a letter. They can continue with letters, numbers or under-
score. String functions must end with $. The location of the DEF IN
statement has no effect on the execution speed of the program.

DEF KEYCODE
is used to create shorthand codes which will be automatically expanded
when they are called up from the keyboard. For example:
         DEF KEYCODE 195: PRINT 123: PRINT "sam" [ENTER]
will assign 'PRINT 123' etc to code 195, the code assigned to key [F3]. So
whenever you press [F3] it will have the effect of PRINTing
      123
      Sam
 on the upper screen area. If you add a final colon to the DEF KEYCODE line,
the automatic [RETURN] is suppressed, so

         DEF KEYCODE 195: PRIM' "sam":

has the effect of PRINTing "sam" in the editing area. Instead of a line, you
can also use this technique with a string, such as:
         DEF KEYCODE 195, "TESTING:"
A defined code can be cleared by omitting the expansion or whatever was
between quotes as in either of the following examples:
         DEF KEYCODE 195:
         DEF KEYCODE 195, " "

DEF PROC
is a statement that precedes the DEFinition of a PROCedure which has a name
and a list of any variables that are being used to pass data to the procedure.

[DELETE]
The [DELETE] key deletes to the left when pressed. [SHIFT] and [DELETE]
pressed together will delete to the right.




                                                                                 139
Glossary

DELETE n TO m
deletes a block of program lines between a pair of chosen line numbers. If
the line numbers are the same, a single line is deleted. If n is omitted, line
number 1 is used. If m is omitted, the last line of the program is used.

DEVICE
lets you use the commands SAVE, LOAD, MERGE and VERIFY with a disk
drive or network of computers. You can use DEVICE in the following ways:
DEVICE d        which tells the computer to use Disk Drive 1
DEVICE d1 which does the same thing
DEVICE D1 which also does the same thing
DEVICE N5 use Network Station 5
DEVICE T        use tape running at standard speed to SAVE data
DEVICE T35 use tape running at fast speed to SAVE data
35 is the top speed likely to prove feasible for saving data on to tape, 112 is
a standard, relatively slow speed. Unfortunately, fast speeds are less reliable
than slow ones. There is no need to remember at what speed you saved your
data, because the LOAD command automatically copes with the full range of
speeds.

DIM
makes space for an array in the computer's memory. The name of the array
can be up to 10 characters long, excluding spaces. The numbers that make
up the DIMensions follow in brackets, and they can be between 1 and 65535.
The total size of the array is only limited by the available memory.

DIR
only works with disks.

Disk
is a magnetic device for the rapid SAVEing, storing and LOADing of computer
data. The SAM Coupé can use 3 ½ -inch ‘floppy disks’.

Disk drive
The SAM Coupé is fitted with two sockets for custom-made extra memory
disk drives. Each drive can contain an additional 256K DRAM.




                                                                                  140
Glossary

DISPLAY n
alters which screen is being DISPLAYed, but not the screen used by BASIC.
One screen can be building up invisibly while another is currently DIS-
PLAYed.
DISPLAY or DISPLAY 0 shows the current screen
DISPLAY 1 to DISPLAY 16 shows the required screen number.

DIV
is the equivalent of dividing one integer by another, so that
        PRINT 241 DIV 24 results in 10

DO
DO acts as a marker to which a matching LOOP statement can return. So:
          10 DO
          20 PRINT "PLAY IT AGAIN SAM";
          30 LOOP
will go round in circles for ever, so it is useful to qualify a DO command. You
can use DO WHILE, which will result in the part of the program between DO
and LOOP being executed WHILE a specified condition is true. Alterna-
tively, you can use DO UNTIL, which is the opposite condition, instructing
the program to execute that part between the DO and LOOP while a
condition is false, but to stop as soon as it becomes true.

DOS
is the abbreviation for Disc Operating System.

DPEEK address
a double PEEK which is the equivalent to PEEK address+256*PEEK
(address+l). See DPOKE.

DPOKE address
executes a double POKE which is the equivalent to:
      POKE address, number - INT (number/ 256)*256
      POKE address + 1, INT (number/256)
In other words, the least significant byte of the number is POKEd to the
address, and the most significant byte is POKEd to the next higher address.
The value must be between 0 and 65535.




                                                                                  141
Glossary
DRAM
is an abbreviation of Dynamic Random Access Memory.

DRAW x, y
is the command for drawing a line relative to the current position, by moving
x pixels to the right and y pixels up. If x or y has a negative value then
movement becomes leftwards or downwards.

DRAW x, y, z
draws a relative line from the current position to the coordinates x, y while
creating a curve by turning through the angle z.

DRAW TO x, y
is the command for drawing an absolute line from the current position to the
point x, y. You can use PAPER, PEN, OVER etc. after DRAW TO.

DRAW TO x, y, z
draws an absolute line from the current position to the coordinates x, y while
creating a curve by turning through the angle z.

DUMP
is used with certain types of printer to stop complicated screens turning into
a mess when they get printed out in black and white. DUMP can be used in
any screen MODE, and will result in unshaded printed copy. Note that in
MODE 3 the result will be twice as wide as other MODEs, because the screen
employs 512 pixels instead of 256 horizontally, and that most screen DUMPs
in this MODE won't fit on little printers!

DUMP CHR$
executes a text screen DUMP of the current screen/window.

[EDIT]
If you press the [EDIT) key, the program line containing the > cursor appears
in the editing area. If you type a line number and then press [EDIT], the
desired line appears for editing. The > cursor is moved left, right, up or down
in the edited line by using the cursor keys, or up and down the listing.




                                                                                  142
Glossary

ELSE
is part of an IF - THEN structure, and must come at the beginning of a new
statement. Normally, when the statement following IF is false, the program
will jump to the next line. But if the IF - THEN pair has an associated ELSE
later in the line, the program will continue with the statements following the
ELSE. On the other hand, if the condition after the IF is true, the line will only
be executed up to the ELSE.

ELSE IF
has a special meaning so that once any condition is true, the lines or
statements after it are executed, and when another ELSE IF or ELSE is
encountered, the program jumps straight to a position immediately after END
IF.

END IF
must be used to end an IF condition.

END PROC
is used to mark the end of a PROCedure already defined by DEF PROC.

ERASE
only works with disks.

[ESC]ape key
when pressed, allows you to BREAK into the program.

EXIT IF
is part of the DO - LOOP structure, and is used to leave the structure from
somewhere in the middle rather than at the DO or LOOP. If the specified
condition after the EXIT IF is true, program execution jumps to the statement
following LOOP, otherwise nothing happens.

EXP
is a mathematical function to calculate exponential numbers, and can be
defined by EXP x = eXx

[F] keys
are the group of function keys, labeled [F0J to [F9] . Each of these keys has
been pre-set to provide a specific function as shown in Chapter 4, allowing
single-key entry during programming, and may be redefined.




                                                                                     143
Glossary

FATPIX
In graphics mode 3, the pixels arc ‘thin’, only half the width used by the other
modes. By using the command FATPIX 1 you can double the width of MODE
3 pixels, making vertical lines the same thickness as horizontal lines, and
XRG will be halved. To get back to the normal `thin' state of affairs use
FATPIX 0, and XRG is doubled.

File
is computerised data that can be SAVEd and act like the magnetic equivalent
to a paper document, self-contained and in its own named binder.

FILL
is a graphic command for FILLing a shape with a colour. See Chapter 6.

FLASH
works in modes 1 and 2 only, and is an attribute of a given colour making it
FLASH rhythmically.
FLASH 1 turns it on. FLASH 0 turns it off. FLASH 8 or 16 sets a ‘transparent’,
state that is left in changed at any character position.

Font
describes the style and appearance of the letters, numbers and symbols as
they appear when PRINTed on screen or onto paper. Character fonts can be
changed as described in Chapter 6.

FOR
is a command which is always used in conjunction with NEXT, and it is used
to cut down repetitive programming. For example, instead of entering a
hundred lines for a hundred similar calculations, you can shortcut
the procedure by writing:

         FOR times=1 TO 100: NEXT times

FORMAT
only works with disks.

FREE
is the function that shows you exactly how much free memory you have left
for BASIC programming and variables.




                                                                                   144
Glossary

Functions
work on numerical values (called arguments) in order to give another value
(called the result), and are used by typing in the name of the function followed
by the argument. Function names in SAM BASIC can have any length.

GET
is a way of reading the keyboard without the use of [ENTER]. It is like
INKEY$, except that GET waits for a key to be pressed before continuing.
When used with a string variable GET acts like a type-writer, so that:
         10 DO: GET a$: PRINT a$;: LOOP
prints keys as you hit them, and you can [SHIFT] between upper and lower
case as normal. If GET is used with a numeric variable such as GET x, then
the variable will equal 1 if Ill is pressed, up to 9 if [9] is pressed. [A] or [a] has
a value of 10, [B] or [b] 11, and so on. GET is very useful in menu-driven
programs (see ON)

GO SUB n
is the statement that tells the program to GO to a numbered SUBroutine, up
to 65279. It must be qualified by a RETURN statement.

GO TO n
instructs the program to GO TO any line number, up to 65279. GO TO can
be used with LABEL, for example:
         GO TO blazes
Please see LABEL.

GRAB a$, x, y, w, L
stores a screen area to a string, which can be PUT somewhere else. The
screen area to be GRABbed is defined by x, y as the top left-hand corner,
followed by w for its width and L for its length in pixels. The x coordinate for
‘fat’ pixels is rounded down to an even value and the y coordinate is rounded
up to an even number.. For mode 3's ‘thin’ pixels, the x and y values are
rounded to a multiple of 4. GRAB and PUT only work in modes 3 and 4.

Graphics coordinates
are normally 173 at the top to -18 at the bottom of the screen. Two lines of
9-pixel high characters are used for the editing area, with point 0, 0 above
them on the left of the screen. By selecting MODE l, character height changes




                                                                                         145
Glossary

to 8 pixels, and the vertical y-axis runs from 175 to -16. The horizontal x-axis
runs from 0 to 255, except in MODE 3's ‘thin’ pixels of 0 to 511. The
coordinate system will change if you alter CSIZE directly.

HEX$
converts the human counting system based on ten fingers (decimals) to a
form of computer binary counting, based on the digits 0 to 9 plus the letters
A to F (hexadecimals), e.g.
         HEX$ 10="A", HEX$ 32768"8000", HEX$ 100000="0186A0"
HEX numbers can be introduced by &, for example:
         &OA=10, &8000=32768

Icon
is a small graphic likeness of an object, concept, technique or message, like
the symbol used in this Manual to represent 'type in the following data'.

IF
is a conditional instruction, which is qualified by THEN. A ‘long'’ IF that works
over several lines is achieved by omitting the THEN and terminating the IF
with END IF.

IN
is a function in BASIC which acts a bit like PEEK When followed by an
address, IN reads the Input/Output port address and its result is a byte read
from that port. OUT acts in a similar way, like POKE.

INK
Please read the section titled PEN.

INKEY$
is the function that reads the keyboard to see which key, if any is being
pressed.

INPUT
Normally, what gets typed during INPUT is shown in the bottom two lines of
the screen, but other streams can be used, e.g.
         INPUT #2; a$ or INPUT #2; "number"; x
allows use of the upper screen.




                                                                                    146
Glossary

INSTR (n,a$,b$)
is a function that searches one string a$ for a target string b$, starting from
position n, and returns its position if found. If it fails to find the target string
it returns 0. INSTR (A$,B$) starts from position 1, and you can use # as a
'match anything' character.

INT
is short for INTeger part, and this function converts a fractional number into
a whole number, known as an integer. It always rounds the fraction down.

[INV]
is the key used to highlight screen characters, by throwing them into a 'negative' display. Pressing
[SYM] [INV] returns the display to its normal state.

INVERSE
changes the way characters and graphics are displayed on the screen.
INVERSE 1 turns all new characters and graphics into a sort of negative of
themselves, and swaps over their PAPER colour with their PEN colour.
INVERSE 0 changes them back to normal.

I/O ports
is short for Input/Output ports, and these are used by the processor for
communicating with the keyboard, printers, other computers, etc.

ITEM
is a function that gives information about the next ITEM to be READ in the
current DATA statement. ITEM has the following values and meanings:
0 means there are no more ITEMs in the current DATA statement.
1 means that the next ITEM is a string type.
2 means that the next ITEM is a numeric type.
When used with procedures, ITEM can reveal the nature of the first ITEM in
a DATA list, passed to the procedure.

K
is the abbreviation for ‘kilo’ that is inaccurately used to represent 1,024 bytes
of computer memory. So, for example, 128k represents 131, 072 bytes.




                                                                                                       147
Glossary

KEY posn,x
makes a KEY in a specified position in the key map produce a chosen
character when it is pressed. KEY positions must be between 0 and 279, and
x must be between 0 and 255. Codes 192 to 254 can be given expanded
definitions, please see DEF KEYCODE. The key map is in the Appendix.

KEYIN a$
enters a string as if you had typed it in yourself, so that it allows programs to
write themselves! For example:
         KEYIN "100 DATA "+a$+","+p$
will add a new line to the program after this is RUN.

Keyword
A keyword is a word which can have a simple meaning in English, but is
recognised by the computer as having a special meaning and treated as a
command to do something very precise. When a keyword is recognised, it
is converted to capital letters in the program listing.

LABEL
can only be used at the start of a line, but preceding colour control codes or
spaces are allowed. When any part of the program is run by RUN, GO TO,
GO SUB etc., variables are created with the name given after any LABELs in
the program, and their values are set to the line number with that LABEL. The
name after LABEL must be a legal numeric variable name. These variables
are recreated when CLEAR is used, or the program is EDITed.

Language
is simply a collection of related commands that allow a computer to perform
useful tasks. The most common language is BASIC, and an advanced version
of this is built into the SAM Coupé’s memory to make programming as easy
as possible.

LEN
is a function used to calculate the LENgth of a string.

LENGTH (d,array name)
is used to tell you the size of an array. If n=1, the first dimension is returned,




                                                                                     148
Glossary

and if n=2, the second dimension is returned. LENGTH can also be used to
find the location of a string or array in memory by using for example:
         LENGTH (0,A$)
which gives the address of the first byte in the string or array data area. This is useful for telling CALL
where the location is when you want to modify the data. For numeric arrays, you have to use brackets
after the name e.g.
         LENGTH (1,x())

LET
is used to give a variable a value, such as:
          LET x=1
The Sam Coupé allows long string and array names, and several LETs can be
made at once.

Light pen
When plugged into the correct port at the back of the Sam Coupé, this device
can be used to communicate directly with a computer program by touching
the screen. The x and y coordinates of the light pen may be read by using
the functions XPEN and YPEN.

Line numbers
All lines entered into a computer program must begin with their own number
so that they can be stored away in order to be acted on when the program is
RUN. It is usual to number lines in tens in case you want to add extra lines
between the existing ones. You can tidy up messy line numbering with the
RENUMber facility, or the automatic AUTO feature, and line numbers can be
up to 65279.

LIST or LLIST
LIST n            lists a specified line number.
LIST n TO m lists a specified block of lines.If the first line number is
            omitted, the first line after 0 is assumed. If the second line
            number is omitted, the last line of the program is assumed.

LIST FORMAT or LLIST FORMAT
allows you to produce an automatic ‘pretty’ listing, with each statement given
its own line and these lines indented to help program readability. The first six




                                                                                                       149
Glossary

columns on the screen are reserved for line numbers and spaces, and
programs can have up to 65279 lines.
LIST FORMAT 0 gives unindented listings.
LIST FORMAT 1 or 2 gives an automatically indented listing by one or two
spaces when certain keywords are recognised in the program.
DEF PROC, DO and FOR indent all following statements by one or two
spaces until they are cancelled by END PROC, LOOP or NEXT.
IF, ON ERROR and ON indent all statements in the rest of the line by one or
two spaces.
ELSE and EXIT IF cancel one or two indentation spaces for the current
statement only.
END IF cancels indentations due to a long IF.

LN
calculates natural logarithms. A logarithmic function is the inverse of an
exponential function.

LOAD
is used to LOAD information from cassette or disk into the computer. If you
are using a cassette player:
LOAD "" loads the first program recognised by the computer, wiping out the
old memory.
LOAD "name" loads the program specified by its name, ignoring any other
program that may be on the disk or tape.
LOAD "name" CODE loads the bytes from the first address at which the bytes
were SAVEd, overwriting any bytes which were previously there.
LOAD "name" CODE start loads the bytes beginning at ‘start’, overriding the
start address from which the bytes were originally SAVEd.
LOAD "name" LINE number loads the program and goes to line number n
automatically.
LOAD "name" DATA a() or a$() deletes any specified array, then searches
for a new one to load.
If you wish to LOAD from one of the internal disk drives, you must first tell
the computer which drive to use with the command:




                                                                                150
Glossary

         DEVICE d or DEVICE d1 or DEVICE D1 for disk drive 1, and
         DEVICE d2 or DEVICE D2 for disk drive 2.

LOCAL
specifies a list of variables which are to be LOCALised to a procedure. They
can include arrays, if you want.

LOOP
is used in conjunction with DO, with LOOP WHILE and LOOP UNTIL
working in exactly the same ways as DO WHILE and DO UNTIL.

LOOP IF (condition)
makes the program jump out of a DO loop from the middle, and carry on
again at the statement after LOOP, only if a condition is true. If it's not true
then the program carries on.

LPRINT
instructs the computer to output to a printer instead of the television screen.
Please see Chapter 6.

Machine code
is the set of instructions that the Sam Coupé's Z80B microprocessor chip uses,
and you can write programs directly to it in ‘assembly language’. Such
programs have to be coded into a sequence of bytes using an assembler, but
if you want to code them yourself there are plenty of books to teach you how.

Memory
The Sam Coupé comes with 32k ROM and 256k DRAM on- board. There are
two internal sockets for an additional 256k DRAM to be installed inside the
machine. Please see Chapter 10.

MEM$ (n TO m)
assigns a section of MEMory to a string. Both n and m must be included, n
can be 0, and the length of the memory ‘slicer’ must be less than 65536. Large
areas of memory can be moved by POKEing the string to a new location, and
you can use INSTRing to search it.

Menus
for computers are the same as menus for restaurants. They provide a table of




                                                                                   151
Glossary

options on screen from which you make your choice.

MERGE
MERGE "name" adds new information from the named program to informa-
tion already in the computer's memory, overwriting any existing program
lines or variables that conflict with the new program.
MERGE "name" CODE suppresses auto-running of BASIC programs that
have already been LOADed. MERGE can't be used with any arrays that may
have been SAVEd.

MGT Plc
stands for Miles Gordon Technology, possibly the most fascinating computer
manufacturers ever to operate from the Swansea Enterprise Park.

MIDI
is the international standard by which musical instruments talk to each other,
and stands for Musical Instrument Digital Interface. The Sam Coupé is able
to control and communicate with all sorts of music devices via its MIDI-IN
and MIDI-OUT ports.

MOD
is a mathematical function whose result is a load of left overs, e. g.
         PRINT 110 MOD 60 will result in 50.

MODE n
clears the screen and selects the numbered screen mode.

Modem
is the abbreviation for MOdulator DEModulator, a device for transmitting
data between computers via telephone lines.

Mouse
is a little device that is connected by a cable to the correct port at the back of
the computer. When slid around over a flat surface it can control a screen
cursor, and when its buttons are clicked it selects various options. The x and
y coordinates of the mouse may be read by using the functions XMOUSE and
YMOUSE.




                                                                                     152
Glossary

MOVE
only works with disks.

Nesting
is the process of placing one or more program blocks inside each other.

Network
Up to 16 Sam Coupés can be linked in a network, with Channel 0 as the
broadcast station and Channels 1 - 15 as personal operator stations.

NEW
gets rid of all old programs and old variables that are in the computer's
memory. When you use the NEW command the computer forgets everything
it has learned since you switched it on.

NEXT
is a special counting command used in a loop. It is always used in conjunction
with the FOR command, and you should refer to the FOR section to see how
 this works.

NOT
is similar to the AND, OR conditions in an IF - THEN statement, except that
 it is completely perverse. The NOT relation is true when the relation is false,
and false whenever it's true! NOT can be regarded as a low priority function
which does not need brackets around it unless it contains AND or OR or both.

ON
allows you to GO SUB or GO TO a particular line number in a list of line
numbers, according to the value of the numeric expression immediately after
ON.

ON ERROR
intercepts mistakes in your programming to allow the program to cope
without stopping and giving an error message. This is known as error
trapping and is detailed in Chapter 12.

OPEN
is used to OPEN streams that are normally closed.




                                                                                   153
Glossary

OPEN n
reserves n additional 16k memory pages for use by BASIC. This allows
CLEAR to set a higher RAMTOP.

OPEN SCREEN n,m
reserves memory for a screen, when qualified by the screen number,
followed by the screen mode. The screen number must be between 2 and 16,
and modes 1 to 4 can be selected. There is only one screen (called 1) when
your computer is switched on.

OPEN SCREEN n,m
reserves memory for a screen, when qualified by the screen number,
followed by the screen mode. The screen number must be between 2 and 16,
and Modes 1 to 4 can be selected. 'There is only one screen (called 1) when
your computer is switched on.
OPEN SCREEN n,m,0 acts the same as OPEN SCREEN n,m
OPEN SCREEN n,m,1 opens a ‘common’ screen, so that if several programs
are present in the machine's memory, they can all use the screen when they
are running.

OR
is a condition that can be used as part of a condition after IF, WHILE, UNTIL
etc, so that an IF statement will work when one relationship OR another is
true. Of course, it will still work if both relationships are true.

Origin
is the term used for the screen graphic coordinates 0,0

OUT p,x
is a statement like POKE, and writes the given value to the designated port
with the given address. P must be between 0 and 65535, x must be between
0 and 255

OVER
is a statement for controlling the pattern of graphic dots on the screen, and
causes a sort of OVERprinting of points, lines and characters. OVER 1 turns
the effect on, and OVER 0 turns it off. In modes 1 and 2 the character
repeatedly prints over itself in a character/blank/character sequence. In




                                                                                154
Glossary

modes 3 and 4 the sequence is character/colour/character, the usual colour
being black. Other effects can be created when used with DRAW, CIRCLE,
PLOT and PUT, where OVER 2 gives ORing of each pixel with the screen,
and OVER 3 gives ANDing Using OVER 1 for a PLOT, DRAW or CIRCLE,
and then repeating the process, will result in the original screen being
restored.

PALETTE
stops all changes to the colours you can use and resets the original colours to
their start-up values.

PALETTE position,colour
sets the position of the palette to any colour you want. There are sixteen
different positions (0 to 15) and 128 different colours available (0 to 127).
Please see Chapter 5 for all other PALETTE commands.

PAPER n
when followed by the selected code number, determines the background
screen colour on which any particular character is to be PRINTed, and can
also be used by typing
         PRINT PAPER n; "whatever follows"

Parameter
refers to a unit that is constant in a given procedure, but can vary in different
arguments.

PAUSE n
allows you to make part of a program take an exact amount of time. Your
screen displays 50 frames every second, so we use numbers counted in
frames to give a very accurate freeze-frame timing. For example:
         PAUSE 125
will freeze your screen for two and a half seconds, or until a key is pressed.

PEEK
is a function used to reveal what's in the computer's memory at an address
within the range 0 to 528K.




                                                                                    155
Glossary

PEN
is used to select a colour on screen for your text and graphics. The values 0
to 15 are the same as those on your PALETTE. If you prefer, you can use the
command INK instead of PEN, it will do the same thing.

PT
is the Greek letter that is used to denote the ratio of the diameter of a circle
to its circumference. In fact, PI is an infinite non-recurring decimal, but you
can always try to confuse your Sam Coupé by typing PRINT PI

Pixel
is supposed to stand for ‘picture element’, and refers to a single addressable
dot of the computer's screen display.

PLOT x,y
is a statement used for setting the start position for drawing pictures and
diagrams on your screen. The drawing begins wherever you instruct the first
pixel to be located. This is done by typing PLOT followed by the x
coordinate, which tells the pixel how far it must be from the left hand side of
your screen, and the y coordinate, saying how far it is from the bottom of the
screen.

POINT (x,y)
gives a pixel's colour at coordinates x,y. In MODES 1 and 2 it can be 0 or 1,
(showing if a pixel is PAPER or PEN), in MODEs 3 and 4 it can be from 0 to 15
(to indicate the pixel's colour).

POKE
is an impolite statement that barges its way past the rules of BASIC and stores
a number directly into a memory location, which we call an address. For the
memory that comes with your Sam Coupé, addresses can be from 0 to 528K.
POKEs in the range 0 to 16384 are not normally effective as this area is
occupied by ROM

POP
takes away a line number from the GO SUB/PROC/DO stack, and throws it
away. When POP is followed by a variable, then the discarded line number
becomes assigned to that variable, so you can jump out of GO SUB routines,
DO loops and PROCedures without messing things up with unused line




                                                                                   156
Glossary

numbers. POP x assigns the discarded return line number to a variable such
as x.

PRINT
is the command that instructs the computer to PRINT out specified charac-
ters, graphics or results on screen. See Chapter 4 for full details of how this
works.

Printer
is a machine that can produce images of text and graphics on paper, known
as 'hard copy', when connected to the appropriate port on the Sam Coupé.

Procedures
make programming easier! By using the statements DEF PROC, END PROC,
DEFAULT, LOCAL and REF, program 'modules' can be created that do a
specific task without affecting the main program. Please see Chapter 4.

Program
is simply a collection of commands used to instruct the computer.

PUT x,y,a$
places a stored area on the screen which has already been GRABbed. The x
coordinate is rounded up to an even value.

PUT x,y,a$,m$
makes use of a second string (which has to be the same length as the first
string) to act as a graphic 'mask' which determines which pixels will be used
from the first string. This allows a complex shape to be placed on a
background as if it was a cut-out without a border. OVER has no effect in this
'masking' mode, but INVERSE will still work.

Radian
A radian is the angle subtended by an arc whose length is equal to the
radius of a circle.

RAM
stands for Random Access Memory. Data stored in RAM is lost when the
RESET button is pressed, or the computer is switched off.




                                                                                  157
Glossary

RAMTOP
is the function that shows you the top address in the computer's Random
Access Memory which is usable by BASIC.

RANDOMIZE
uses a 'seed' number to calculate 'random' numbers. RANDOMIZE or
RANDOMIZE 0 sets it to the number of frames generated since the computer
was switched on. RANDOMIZE n sets the random number 'seed' to
a specified number.

READ
is a statement that is followed by a list of the names of variables separated by
commas. It works like an INPUT statement, but saves you the trouble of
typing in the values of the variables by looking them up itself from DATA
statements. You can also use READ LINE with string variables, allowing you
to omit quotes in DATA statements.

RECORD STOP
turns off the graphic recording. This command works in any mode.

RECORD TO a$
lets you record graphic commands as STRINGs, so they can be executed a
lot faster when you BLITZ them. While RECORD is on, the following
commands will be recorded: CIRCLE, CLS, DRAW, DRAW TO, OVER,
PAUSE, PEN, PLOT (but not PLOT PEN).

REM
is simply a REMinder statement in a program, put there for your use not the
computer's. REM can be followed by anything you like, and the computer
will ignore it. You can use it to title blocks of information, such as:
         10 REM income tax routine

RENUM
automatically RENUMbers an entire program in steps of 10, starting with line
10.

RENUM n to m
automatically RENUMbers part of a program, starting from line n and includ-




                                                                                   158
Glossary

ing line m. If line n is left out, the first line is assumed. If line m is omitted,
the last line is assumed.

RENUM STEP s
makes the new line numbers go up in steps of s, if there is enough space.
STEP, LINE and the program ‘slicer’ can be used or left out as you wish, but
must occur in the following order:
          RENUM n TO m LINE L STEP s

[RESET] button
when pressed, this button at the back of the machine DOES reset the CPU
memory, the floppy disk controllers, the memory page registers, MIDI-IN,
MIDI-OUT and the BORDER registers. It does NOT reset the colour look-up
table, sound chip registers or the LINE INTerrupt.

RESTORE n
RESTOREs the DATA pointer to the first DATA statement in line n or the
nearest line after the designated number. If the number is omitted, RESTORE
will be 0, i.e. set to the first DATA statement, if any. A RESTORE also happens
every time a BASIC program is LOADed.

[RETURN]
is the key used to commit a line of instructions into a program. Technically,
[RETURN] terminates a subroutine.

RETURN
a RETURN address gives a line and statement that is jumped to after a GO
SUB.

RGB
is the abbreviation for the system of coloured dots that make up any colour
on your screen by combining Red, Green and Blue.

ROLL d,p
moves the picture on your screen and wraps it around itself. Movement is
controlled by direction d (1=left, 2=up, 3=right, 4=down), followed by the
number of pixels to be moved, p. P can be 1, 2, 4, 6, etc, but not 3, 5, 7 etc.




                                                                                      159
Glossary

ROLL d,p,x,y,w,L
only ROLLs the screen section designated by x,y coordinates marking the
top-left corner, followed by w pixels wide and L pixels long. X is rounded
to an even coordinate and w is rounded to an even number of pixels. ROLL
commands only work in modes 3 and 4.

ROM
stands for Read Only Memory, and is the unchangeable part of computer's
brain that has been educated in the factory.

RND
generates so-called random numbers, starting at a point in a fixed sequence
of 65536 numbers. Please see Chapter 4.

RUN
commands the program to be RUN. To RUN a program from any particular
line, you should use RUN n.

SAVE "name"
christens a program and commands the computer to send a copy of that
program from its memory to be recorded.

SAVE "name" LINE number
is a neat way of getting the program to GO TO a particular line when it gets
LOADed.

SAVE "name" CODE start address, length
records information without any reference to what that information is to be
used for. The first number (start address) must be the address of the first unit
of storage memory known as a byte. The second number (length) is the
number of bytes to be stored. The address is a number between 0 and 528K.
Length can be from 1 byte to 512K.

SAVE "name" CODE start, length, execute-address
will SAVE an auto running CODE file.

SAVE "name" SCREEN$
SAVEs a screen with its PALETTE and MODE information.




                                                                                   160
Glossary

SAVE "name" DATA a$()
saves an array or string designated by its own particular name. Quotes are
optional for strings or string arrays.

SAVE string LINE number
tells the computer to record a program in such a way that when it is LOADed
it jumps to a particular line number and RUNs itself.

Screen dump
is the process of reproducing what is displayed on screen to a printer.

SCREEN n
selects a SCREEN for BASIC; commands to use. N must be between 1 and 16, and the SCREEN
must first be OPENed. So that:
        OPEN SCREEN 2: SCREEN 2
makes commands like PRINT, LIST, PLOT and DRAW use a second SCREEN
leaving SCREEN 1 intact until SCREEN 1 is typed again. Please also see DISPLAY.

SCREEN$ (r,c)
is a function that works in any mode and identifies user-defined graphics in
the range CHR$ 32 to 168 as well as normal characters. It does not recognise
block graphics and it makes no difference if BLOCKS 0 or 1 has been
specified.

SCROLL d,p
works in exactly the same way as ROLL d,p except that there is no wrap
around effect. Blank background replaces the lost data. SCROLL commands
only work in Modes 3 and 4.

SCROLL d,p,x,w,L
works in exactly the same way as ROLL d,p,x,y,w,L except that there is no
wrap around effect.

SCROLL CLEAR
disables the ‘Scroll?’ prompt on screen, so that when a screen becomes full
it will scroll without any message or the need for a key to be pressed.




                                                                                     161
Glossary

SCROLL RESTORE
turns the ‘Scroll?’ prompt back on.

SGN
is the sign function, which is sometimes known as the'signum'. So if you want
to know the result of an argument, SGN will give +1 if the argument is positive,
0 if it is zero, and -1 if the argument is negative.

[SHIFT]
when pressed simultaneously with other keys, the [SHIFT]ed keys are used to PRINT upper case
letters and alternative characters.

SIN
is a trigonometrical function that calculates a SINe.

Slicers
are specified strings or substrings. A slicer can be a numerical expression, an
 optional numeric expression TO another optional numeric expression, or it
can be empty.

Software
is a list of instructions used to control the computer, which is stored to and
LOADed from cassette or disk.

SOUND r,d
sends data byte d to sound chip register r. Up to 127 pairs of numbers can be
used, like this:
          SOUND r,d;r,d;r,d etc

Space
The long [SPACE] bar at the bottom of the keyboard acts the same as any
conventional typewriter or wordprocessor.

SQR
commands the computer to calculate the square root of a number n. The
result is a number that when multiplied by itself gives n.

Stack
refers to a number of data items ‘stacked'’in order of usage, with a specific




                                                                                           162
Glossary

purpose in a computer program, such as a GO SUB stack or a calculator stack.

Statement
consists of an individual instruction in a program line. Multiple statements in
a single line are separated by colons.

STEP n
is used in a FOR - NEXT loop to qualify the control variable which normally
goes up 1 every time, like this:
          FOR control variable = first value TO last value STEP n
The STEP need not be a positive or a whole number, for example:
          FOR x=100 to 1 STEP -1.5

STOP
halts the program and displays the ‘STOP’ code on screen. When the program
is started off again with CONTINUE it resumes at the next statement.

Strings
in theory can be 65520 characters long, and their maximum legal names may
be up to 10 characters long.

STRING$ (n,a$)
repeats a string for the number of times you choose.

STR$
converts numbers into strings. The function ends in a $ symbol to show that
its result is a string. Please see VAL.

Subroutine
is a block of numbered statements which perform a specific duty, and can be
called up many times by the GO SUB statement.

SVAR n
gives the address of System VARiable n.


[SYMB]
when pressed, the [SYMB] shift key gives access to alternative characters and
operations from the keyboard.




                                                                                  163
Glossary

Syntax error
in BASIC is similar to making mistakes in the English language when rules are
broken. The computer is unforgiving if an error is made in the use of pun-
ctuation 'marks or) a keyworp is missplleed! Certain errors will be automati-
cally corrected such as gosub and RANDOMISE, and the easiest method of
writing programs is to type in lower case, and observe key words turning into
capital letters as they are displayed in their lines.

System variables
control all sorts of operations, and each has its own SVAR number. The most
useful system variables are listed at the end of this Manual. There are
hundreds more listed in the Sam Coupé Technical Manual!

TAB
is a PRINT qualifier used to indent text and set up columns of text or numerals
into orderly columns.

TAN
is a trigonometrical function that calculates a TANgent (a sine divided by a
cosine).

TO
is used to set the limitations in a FOR - NEXT loop, for example:
        FOR play=1 TO 69: NEXT play

TRUNC$ a$
gives a$ with any trailing spaces deleted. This is useful when you take data
from string arrays, so that normally:
         DIM a$ (10,10): LET a$(1)="sam": PRINT a$(1)
will result in "sam     " being PRINTed, whereas you can use:
         PRINT TRUNC$ a$(1)
which results in " Sam"

UDG" "
gives the address of any user-defined graphic character from CHR$ 32 to
168. The range from CHR$ 169 to 255 is available to advanced users.




                                                                                  164
Glossary

UNTIL
is a condition used with DO and LOOP. Please refer to these commands.

USR n
When a numeric argument is a start address, USR is employed to run machine
code, and allows values from 0 to 524287

VAL
Is a very powerful function that converts strings back into numbers. The string
can be any numeric expression. VAL takes away the quotes from a string,
evaluates the arguments and finally evaluates whatever is left as a number.

VAL$
is similar to VAL, with a string for an argument but giving a result which is also
a string.

Variable
There are four types of variables, which are the names given to identify certain
values in programs.

Numeric variable names must start with a letter and be followed by
numbers, letters, underlining and spaces up to 32 characters long. Spaces
don't count as characters.
FOR-NEXT variables arc similar to numeric variables, but are treated differ-
ently internally.

String variable names and array variable names are similar, but can be no
longer than 10 characters long and must be followed by $.

VDU
stands for Visual Display Unit, and generally refers to any unit housing a
screen for displaying computer generated images.

VERIFY "name"
checks that the information on tape or disk is exactly the same as the infor-
mation in the computer's memory with the same name.




                                                                                     165
Glossary

VERIFY "name" CODE
checks the bytes on tape or disk, starting at the address from which the first
byte was saved.

VERIFY "name" CODE start
checks the bytes on tape or disk against those in memory starting at the
address number given.

VERIFY "name" CODE start, length
checks the bytes on tape or disk against the bytes in memory starting at the
address number given. If the file on tape or disk is longer than the designated
length, the "Loading error" message will be given.

VERIFY "name" DATA
checks the named array on tape or disk against the one stored in memory.

WHILE
is a condition used with DO and LOOP. Please refer to these commands.

WINDOW left, right, top, bottom
sets up a text WINDOW. The limits are set by designating which left-hand
column to use (0 or above), followed by the right-hand column (maximum
84 in Mode 3 with 6-pixel wide characters), followed by the top line to be used
(0 or above) with the fourth number giving the bottom line of the WINDOW.
If the requested borders are not allowed in the current mode or character size
then 'Invalid WINDOW' is reported.

x-axis y-axis
are nominal reference lines used in trigonometry, cutting a circle from side to
side (x-axis) and from top to bottom (y-axis).

x-coordinate y coordinate
coordinates locate an exact point on the screen. X is the distance from the left-
hand side of the screen, and Y is the distance from the bottom of the screen.

XMOUSE YMOUSE
please see MOUSE




                                                                                    166
Glossary

XOS XRG YOS YRG
are special functions that control the graphics scaling system in terms of scale
and origin. Please see Chapter 6.

XPEN YPEN
please see PEN

The following symbols have specific meanings when used within a SAM
Coupe BASIC program, which may be different from their meanings in
conventional English.

+       plus
-       minus
*      multiplied by
/       divided by equal to
<>      not equal to
>       greater than
<       less than
>=      greater than or equal to
<=      less than or equal to
X       raise to the power of
&       is used to introduce hex numbers
()      act as conventional brackets in numerical expressions
[]      is used in this Manual to indicate a specific key to be pressed
#       can be used to introduce a stream or channel number, or as a
        'match anything' token. It is sometimes referred to as "hash"
        or "number".




                                                                                   167
Glossary
'   apostrophes in a PRINT statement cause whatever follows to
    appear at the left hand margin of the next line
"   quotation marks enclose strings, all characters inside quota-
    tion marks will be PRINTed exactly as typed. Please see
    Chapter 4 for other details
,   commas tabulate the following PRINT statement by 16 columns
:   a colon is used to separate commands in a line of program
;   semi-colons cause PRINT statements to appear concurrently
.   the full stop can be used instead of the decimal point key
?   appears in your EDITing lines whenever you manage to
    confuse the Sam Coupé




                                                                    168
SAM Coupé
Appendix

   General Specifications
   Lead Connections
   Pin Connections
   System Variables
   Predefined Keys
   Keyboard Map
   Control Codes




“Yoghurt is very
good for
appendicitis”
   (Eugène Ionesco)




“Man is still the
Most extraordi-
Nary computer
of all”
  (John F. Kennedy)




                            169
Appendix                                            General Specifications


MILES CORDON TECHNOLOGY, Sam Coupé
ENGINE      Z80B microprocessor running at 6MHz.
CONTROL     Customised VLSI 10,000-gate ASIC chip.
ROM         32K including SAM BASIC, disk bootstrap, BIOS.
RAM         256K upgradeable to 512K (256K x 4 100nS DRAM).
SOUND       Philips SAA 1099 Synthesizer: 6 channel, 8 octave, stereo with
            envelope and amplitude control, plus wave form choice.
GRAPHICS    Motorola MC 1377P Video Chip. ASIC serves as graphic
            processor. All Modes allow 128 colours to be displayed on
            screen by redefining line interrupt:
            Mode 1: 32 x 24 character cells per screen, cacti cell with 2
            colour capability; 16 colours selectable from 128; Spectrum
            attribute compatible.
            Mode 2: as Mode 1, but 32 x 192 cells, each cell with 2 colour
            capability; 16 colours selectable from 128.
            Mode 3: up to 85 column text display, 512 x 192 pixel screen
            with each pixel colour selectable; 4 colours per line selectable
            from 128.
            Mode 4: 256 x 192 pixel graphics screen; each pixel colour
            selectable; 16 colours per line selectable from 128.
INTERFACES  UHF TV Channel 36, through power supply unit. Colour
            composite video, digital and linear RGB, all through SCART.
            Atari-standard joystick (dual-capacity with splitter cable).
            Mouse, Coupè standard. Light-pen/Light-gun, Coupe standard.
            Domestic cassette recorder. MIDI-In, MIDI-Out (MIDI-Through
            via software switch). Network, screened microphone cable via
            external MCT interface to Expansion Port. 64-pin Expansion
            Port for further peripherals.
DISK DRIVES 1 or 2 removeable and internally mounted 3.5" ultra-slim Citizen
            drives, 1Mb unformatted, 780K formatted.
DC POWER    Power Supply 4.75 volts to 5.25 volts.
CONSUMPTION Power Consumption 11.2 Watts.
SHOCK       Operating 3 G, non-operating 60 G.
VIBRATION   Operating 5 to 500Hz / 0.5 G, non-operating 5 to 500Hz / 2 G.
ENVIRONMENT Ambient Temperature, operating 5 to 45C, storage -20 to 50C.
HUMIDITY    Relative Humidity Wet Bulb Maximum 29.AC, nil condensation.
RELIABILITY MTBF: 10,000 POH. MTTR: 30 Mins. Component Life: >5 years.
WEIGHT      2.26Kg = 4.971b.




                                                                               170
Appendix                                                Lead Connections
MIDI lead
MIDI SOCKET PLUG DIN 5                     MIDI DEVICE SOCKET PLUG DIN 5




                   Cable Type: 2-core with Screen, length 2m

NETWORK lead
MIDI SOCKET PLUG DIN 7                              FROM NETWORK PLUG DIN 7




                   Cable Type: 1-core with Screen, length 2m

MOUSE lead
COMP. END PLUG DIM 8                                           MGT Mouse




                       Cable Type: 8-core flex, length 1.25m




                                                                           171
Appendix                                             Lead Connections

CASSETTE lead
     COMP. END 3.5MM Jack                            EAR/MIC 3.5mm Jack




                Cable Type:1-core with Screen, length 0.75m


LIGHT PEN lead                                LIGHT PEN




     LIGHT PEN PLUG DIN 5
                Cable Type: 4-core with Screen, length 1.75m

SCART lead
     SAM SCART                                MONITOR STD. SCART




                 Cable Type: 8-core with Screen, length 2m
UHF TV lead


TV AERIAL                                                         COMPUTER
                                                                  PHONO
        Aerial Plug                                  Phono Plug

                  Cable Type: 1-core with Screen, length 2



                                                                          172
Appendix                                                                 Pin Connections
Pin connections. All plugs and sockets are viewed from the back of the
SAM Coupè. Please see the following page for Expansion Connector
Details.




                                                                                     173
Appendix                                                             Pin Connections

EXPANSION CONNECTOR
Standard 64-pin Euroconnector socket with rows A-C fitted. Note that row
A is at the bottom of the Euroconnector and row C is located at the top,
thus:

                 1C                                                        32C

                 1A                                                        32A


              PIN     SIGNAL                               PIN    SIGNAL
              1A      DBDIR                                1C     IORQ
              2A      RD                                   2C     MREQ
              3A      WR                                   3C     HALT
              4A      BUSAK                                4C     NMI
              5A      WAIT                                 5C     TNT
              6A      BUSREQ                               6C     CD1
              7A      RESET                                7C     CD0
              8A      CMI                                  8C     CD7
              9A      REFRESH                              9C     CD2
              l0A     0 VOLTS                              IOC    +5 VOLTS
              11A     A0                                   11C    CD6
              12A     A1                                   12C    CD5
              13A     A2                                   13C    CD3
              14A     A3                                   14C    CD4
              15A     A4                                   15C    CPU CLK
              16A     A5                                   16C    A15
              17A     A6                                   17C    A14
              18A     A7                                   18C    A13
              19A     A8                                   19C    A12
              20A     A9                                   20C    A11
              21A     A10                                  21C    DISK 2
              22A     NO CONNECTION                        22C    ROMCS
              23A     XMEM                                 23C    EARMIC
              24A     8MHz                                 24C    DISK 1
              25A     RED 1                                25C    PRINT
              26A     GREEN 1                              26C    BLUE 1
              27A     C SYNC                               27C    ROMCSR
              28A     SPEN                                 28C    AUDIO RIGHT OUTPUT
              29A     BLUE 0                               29C    AUDIO LEFT OUTPUT
              30A     RED 0                                30C    COMP VIDEO
              31A     BRIGHT                               31C    GREEN 0
              32A     +5 VOLTS                             32C    0 VOLTS




                                                                                       174
Appendix                                                                  System Variables

There are over 600 bytes of system variables available for the advanced
programmer. The full list is contained in the SAM Coupé Technical
Manual available from MGT. The following list is of the most useful
system variables, which are altered by, e.g.
          POKE SVAR 8,10 or
          POKE SVAR 1,"LU"
       They can be examined by, e.g.
          PRINT PEEK SVAR 8

NAME           SVAR NUMBER
LNCUR                  0       CURRENT LINE CURSOR CHAR (NORMALLY
LCCUR                  1       CURSOR CHARACTER WHEN CAPS LOCK IS OFF
                               (NORMALLY ‘*’)
UCCUR                  2       CURSOR CHARACTER WHEN CAPS LOCK IS ON
                               (NORMALLY ‘+’)
BINIDIG                3       CIIARACTER USED BY BIN$ AS ‘1’ (NORMALLY ‘1’)
BINODIG                4       CHARACTER USED BY BIN$ AS ‘0’ (NORMALLY ‘0’)
INSTHASH               5       CHARACTER USED BY INSTR AS ‘MATCH ANY
                               TIIING' CHARACTER (NORMALLY'#')
SLDEV                  6       CURRENT DEVICE LETTER (USUALLY 'T' ON A
                               TAPE SYSTEM)
SLNUM                  7       CURRENT TAPE SAVE SPEED, OR DEFAULT DRIVE
                               NUMBER WHEN A DISK DRIVE IS IN USE
SPEEDINK               8       SPEED OF FLASHING COLOURS (SEE PALETTE
                               COMMAND)
PRRHS                  14      RIGHT-HAND TEXT COLUMN FOR PRINTERS (1
                               LESS THAN THE MAXIMUM LINE LENGTH DE-
                               SIRED)
AFTERCR                15      CHARACTER CODE SENT TO THE PRINTER AFTER
                               CHR$ 13 IF CHANNEL 'P' IS IN USE. (NORMALLY
                               10, TO GIVE AUTOMATIC LINE FEED.) POKE SVAR
                               15,0 TO STOP ANY CHARACTER BEING SENT.
DMPTL                  16      (2 BYTES) ADDRESS IN SCREEN OF TOP LEFT
                               CORNER FOR GRAPHIC DUMPS




                                                                                       175
Appendix                                    System Variables

DMPLEN     18   GRAPHIC DUMP LENGTH (IN 8-PIXEL UNITS;
                NORMALLY 22)
DMPWID     19   GRAPHIC DUMP WIDTH (IN 8-FAT-PIXEL UNITS;
                NORMALLY 32)
DMPWM      20   GRAPHIC DUMP WIDTH MULTIPLIER (1=NORMAL;
                 2 OR 3 CAN BE USED FOR DOUBLE OR TRIPLE
                WIDTH)
DMPHM      21   GRAPHIC DUMP HEIGHT MULTIPLIER (1=NOR-
                MAL, NOT 1=DOUBLE)
GCMI       22   (9 BYTES) INITIAL MESSAGE SENT TO PRINTERS
                BEFORE A DUMP
GCM2       31   (8 BYTES) MESSAGE SENT BEFORE EACH DUMPED
                ROW
GCM3       39   (7 BYTES) FINAL MESSAGE SENT TO PRINTERS
                AFTER A DUMP
TABVAR     47   0 IF TH E PRINT COMMA SHOULD TAB BY 16
                COLUMNS, NOT 0 IF AN 8 COLUMN TAB IS TO BE
                USED
SOFE       50   FLAGFOR SCREEN OFF ENABLE/DISABLE, NOR-
                MALLY 0 (ON); THE SCREEN WILL GO BLACK IF
                YOU DO NOT USE THE KEYBOARD FOR 22
                MINUTES. POKE SVAR 50,1 TO DISABLE THIS
                FEATURE
TPROMPTS   51   BIT 0=1 TO SUPPRESS PRINTING OF FILE NAMES
                DURING LOAD; BIT 1=1 TO SUPPRESS PROMPTS
                DURING SAVE TO TAPE
BGFLG      52   BLOCK GRAPHICS FLAG. 0 IF BLOCKS 1, NOT 0
                IF BLOCKS 0
FL6OR8     53   0 IF MODE 3 IS USING 6-PIXEL WIDE CHARAC-
                TERS, OTHERWISE NOT 0
CSIZEH     54   CHARACTER HEIGHT
CSIZEW     55   CHARACTER WIDTH
UWRHS      56   UPPER WINDOW RIGHT-HAND COLUMN
UWLHS      57   UPPER WINDOW LEFT-HAND COLUMN
UWTOP      58   UPPER WINDOW TOP ROW
UWBOT      59   UPPER WINDOW BOTTOM ROW




                                                             176
Appendix                                     System Variables

LWRHS      60    LOWER WINDOW RIGHT-HAND COLUMN
LWLHS      61    LOWER WINDOW LEFT-HAND COLUMN
LW TOP     62    LOWER WINDOW TOP ROW
LWBOT      63    LOWER WINDOW BOTTOM ROW
MODE       64    SCREEN MODE (MINUS 1)
YCOORD     65    CURRENT GRAPHICS Y COORDINATE, 0 AT THE
                 TOP
XCOORD     66    (2 BYTES) CURRENT GRAPHICS X COORDINATE
LASTH      513   LAST KEY PRESSED
KBHEAD     520   KEY AT HEAD OF KEYBOARD BUFFER QUEUE
REPDEL     521   DELAY BEFORE KEYS AUTO-REPEAT
REPSPD     522   SPEED AT WHICH KEYS AUTO-REPEAL
CHARS      566   (2 BYTES) ADDRESS 256 BYTES BELOW MAIN
                 CHARACTER SET
ERRSOUND   568   LENGTH OF ERROR SOUND
CLICK      569   LENGTH OF KEYBOARD CLICK
KPFLG      615   FUNCTION KEYS IF EVEN, NUMBER PAD IF ODD
KLFLAG     618   8 IF CAPS LOCK ON, OTHERWISE 0
FRAMES     632   (3 BYTES) TV FRAMES SINCE COMPUTER TURNED
                 ON
UDG        635   (2 BYTES) ADDRESS OF CHARACTER PATTERN
                 FOR CHR$ 144
HUDG       637   (2 BYTES) ADDRESS OF CHARACTER PATTERN
                 FOR CHR$ 169




                                                             177
Appendix                                                              Predefined Keys


Numbers in brackets are character codes. Characters with codes of 128 and
above can have several interpretations, depending on BLOCKS 0 or 1 being
used, or if they are enclosed by quotation marks. E.g. [SYMB] [L] gives the
key word LET if used outside of quotes, or £ if used inside them. [SYMB]
[RETURN] toggles the keys [F0] to [F9] to give numbers. [CNTRL] [P] gives
the PAPER control code and [CNTRL] [I] gives the PEN control code: press
0 to 7 to select a colour number. [CNTRL] [B] gives the BRIGHT control code:
press 0 or 1 to force PEN and PAPER to be in the range 0 to 7 or 8 to 15.
Obviously, some characters occur in several places on the keyboard, and this
is for the convenience of users familiar with different keyboard layouts.

       NORMAL                +[CAPS]   +[SYMBOL]        +[CNTRL]
       Top line of keys

        ESCape                ESCape    ESCape           ESCape
        1                     !         (129) Å          (142) ˆ
        2                     @         (130)            (141) ˜
        3                     #         (131) Ç          (140) Ò
        4                     $         (132) Î          (139)
        5                     %         (133) ‰          (138) Ô
        6                     &         (134) Ï          (137) È
        7                     /         (135) Ì          (136) Ó
        8                     (         (128)            (143) Ø
        9                     )         |
        0                     -         -
        1                     /         /
        +                     *         *
        DEL Lt                DEL Rt    DEL Rt
        F7 (199)              (209)     7
        F8 (200)              (210)     8
        F9 (201)              (211)     9

       Second line of keys

        TAB                   TAB       TAB
        q                     Q         <
        w                     W         >
        e                     E         é
        r                     R         [
        t                     T         ]
        y                     Y         ¥
        u                     U         ü
        i                     I         INVERSE          (PEN CC)
        o                     O         ö
        p                     P         PRINT            (PAPER CC)
        =                     _         _
        “                     ©         COPY
        F4 (196)              (206)     4
        F5 (197)              (207)     5
        F6 (198)              (208)     6




                                                                                  178
Appendix                                                                        Predefined Keys



   NORMAL                          +[CAPS]            +[SYMBOL]           +[CNTRL]
    third line of keys

    CAPS Lk                CAPS Lk           CAPS Lk
    A                      A                 STOP
    S                      S                 SAVE
    D                      D                 DRAW
    F                      F                 {
    G                      G                 }
    H                      H                 Q
    J                      J                 _
    K                      K                 +
    L                      L                 £ LET
    ;                      ;                 +
    :                      :                 *
    RETURN                 RETURN            RETURN
    F1 (193)               (203)             1
    F2 (194)               (204)             2
    F3 (195)               (205)             3

     fourth line of keys

    SHIFT                  SHIFT             SHIFT                SHIFT
    z                      Z                 ?
    x                      X                 ?
    c                      C                 ¿ CSIZE
    v                      V                 VERIFY
    b                      B                 BORDER               (BRIGHT CC)
    n                      N                 _ BRIGHT
    m                      m                 a INVERSE
    `                      `                 <
    .                      .                 >
    INV                    \                 TRU-VID
    SHIFT                  SHIFT             SHIFT                SHIFT
    F0 (192)               (202)             0
    UP                     UP                UP
    .                      .                 .

    bottom line of keys

    SYMB                   SYMB              SYMB                 SYMB
    CNTRL                  CNTRL             CNTRL                CNTRL
    SPACE                  SPACE             SPACE
    EDIT                   EDIT              toggle
    SYMB                   SYMB              SYMB                 SYMB
    LEFT                   LEFT              LEFT
    DOWN                   DOWN              DOWN
    RIGHT                  RIGHT             RIGHT




                                                                                            179
Appendix                                                          Control Codes
6      When printed: PRINT COMMA (TAB)
       When coming directly from the keyboard: CAPS LOCK TOGGLE
7      When printed:_?_
       When coming directly from the keyboard: EDIT
8      CURSOR LEFT
9      CURSOR RIGHT
10     CURSOR DOWN
11     CURSOR UP
12     DELETE LEFT
13     RETURN
14     When printed: SPACE.
       When coming directly from the keyboard: DELE'T'E RIGHT
15     When printed:_?_
       When coming directly from the keyboard: KEY PAD TOGGLE
16     PEN
17     PAPER
18     FLASH
19     BRIGHT
20     INVERSE
21     OVER
22     AT
23     TAB


                                                           Keyboard Map




Add 70 to obtain map position of a key plus [SHIFT]
Add 140 to obtain map position of a key plus [SYMB)
Add 210 to obtain map position of a key plus [CNTRL]
E.g. 'a' is at position 70, 'A' is at position 140.




                                                                            180
Index




        181
Index
ABS                           46,132   CODE                   58, 112, 137
ACS                           47,132   colons                       31, 168
addition                          44   colour chart                       65
address             60,113, 114, 132   commands                         137
AND                           54,132   commas               31, 34, 87, 168
animation                         82   conditions                    36, 137
apostrophes                  35, 168   CONTINUE                      33, 137
arrays                       38, 132   control codes               137, 180
array variables                   39   COS                           47, 137
ASCII code                      133    CSIZE                   86, 118,138
ASN                           47,133   cursor                        30, 138
AT                           87, 133   cursor keys                   12, 138
ATN                           47,133   Customer Care Line                  2
attributes                   70, 133
AUTO                          49,133   DATA                     52, 59, 138
                                       DEFAULT                      60, 138
BEEP                         94, 134   DEF FN                       57, 139
BIN                          90, 134   DEF KEYCODE                      139
BIN$                            134    DEF PROC                     59, 139
bit                        110, 134    DELETE                       30, 140
BLITZ                        78,134    [DELETE] key             14, 30, 139
block graphics               89, 178   DEVICE                      115,140
BLOCKS                        88,134   DIM                      38, 54, 140
BOOT                        115,134    DIR                         115,140
BORDER                        67,135   disks                         15,140
brackets                     45, 167   disk drives               9,115,140
[BREAK] button                 9,135   DISPLAY                       79,141
BRIGHT                        70,135   DIV                              141
BUTTON                          135    division                          44
byte                        110,135    DO                            55,141
                                       DPEEK DPOKE                 113,141
cables                 3, 4, 10, 171   DRAW                          75,142
calculations                      44   DUMP                         106,142
CALL                        113,135    DUMP CHR$                        142
[CAPS] lock             14, 135,178
cassettes                         15   [EDIT] key                    30,142
cassette recorder              10,20   education                        118
channels                   107, 118    ELSE                         40, 143
character set                88, 136   ELSE IF                      41, 143
CHR$                     59, 89, 136   END IF                        40,113
CIRCLE                        76,136   END PROC                      60, l43
cleaning                          15   ERASE                       115,143
CLEAR                  39, 114, 136    error codes              23, 29, 129
CLOSE                       112,136    error trapping                   129
CLOSE SCREEN                  79,136   [ESC] key                26, 33, 143
CLS                      34, 79, 137   equals                            36
[CNTRL] key              85,138,178    Euroconnector                     10




                                                                               182
Index
EXIT IF                           56, 143    LENGTH                            54,148
EXP                               45, 143    less than                             36
expansion connector               10, 104    LET                              37, 149
exponentiation                      44,45    light pen                   11, 105,149
expressions                            44    line numbers                 21, 29,149
                                             LIST                              48, 149
FATPIX                            76, 144    LIST FORMAT                       51, 149
FILL                                   76    listing                                51
FLASH                             70, 144    LLIST                           106, 149
floating point                         52    LIST FORMAT                       51, 149
FOR                               42, 144    LN                                45, 150
FORMAT                           115, 144    LOAD                20, 22, 26, 115, 150
FREE                         48, 111, 144    LOCAL                              60,151
functions                     45, 47, 145    LOOP                              55, 151
function keys                     57, 143    LPRINT                          106, 151
GET                               84, 145    machine code                    112, 151
GO SUB                            43, 145    memory                          110, 151
GO TO                             33, 145    MEM$                            111, 151
GRAB                          76, 81, 145    MERGE               20, 25, 26, 115,152
graphics coordinates          75, 77, 145    MIDI-IN/MIDI-OUT        9, 97, 110, 152
graphics scaling system                77    MOD                                  152
greater than                           36    MODE                             67, 152
HEX $                                146     mouse                      10, 105, 152
                                             MOVE                           115, 153
IF                         36, 40,56, 146    multiplication                        43
IN                                114,146
INK                                     67   nesting                          41,153
INKEY$                                  84   networks                   10, 118, 153
INPUT                     24, 33, 119, 146   NEW                              34,153
INSTR                         59, 111,147    NEXT                            42, 153
INT                                 45,147   NOT                             54, 153
[INV] key                      49, 71, 147   numeric variables                    39
INVERSE                        71, 81, 147ON                                   57,153
ITEM                               60, 147ON ERROR                           129,153
joysticks                            105 [ON/OFF] button                         4,10
joystick port                          10 OPEN                               112,153
                                          OPEN SCREEN                    78, 111,154
key positions                    148, 178 OR                                  54, 154
keyboard                               12 OUT                               114, 154
keyboard map                         181 OVER                             71, 81,154
KEYIN                                148
keywords                          28, 148 PALETTE                         64, 71, 155
                                          PAPER                               67, 155
LABEL                              61,148 parameter                               155
lead connections                     171 PAUSE                            32, 97, 155
LEN                               48, 148 PEEK                               113,155




                                                                                         183
Index
PEN                              67, 156  SOUND                               100, 162
PI                               46, 156  sound effects                            100
pin connections                      173  [SPACE] bar                          13, 162
pitch values                          95  specifications                           170
Pixels                   68, 74,86, 156   SQR                                  45, 162
PLOT                             74, 156  stack                                    162
POINT                            71, 156  statements                           29, 163
POKE                           113, 156   STEP                              42, 50,163
POP                             60, 156   streams                             107, 119
power supply unit                3, 4, 11 STOP                                 32, 163
PRINT statements                 34, 157  STR$                                 58, 163
Printers                             105  strings                          37, 58, 163
procedures                       59, 157  STRING$                              37, 163
program names                         24  string variables                          39
punctuation                 31, 34, 167   subroutines                          43, 163
PUT                               81,157  substrings                                37
                                          subtraction                               44
radian                            47, 157 [SYMB] key              21, 36, 85, 163, 178
RAM                                18,157 system variables                61, 164, 175
RAMTOP                          111, 158 SVAR                             61, 163, 175
random numbers                         51
RANDOMIZE                          52,158 TAB                             34, 87, 164
READ                         53, 54, 158 TAN                                  47, 164
RECORD                      85, 119, 158 television sets                      4, 6, 16
REF                                    61 THEN                                36, 146
REM statements                      31,49 TO                                  42, 164
RENUM                              50,158 trouble shooting                  6, 16 122
[RESET] button                 6, 10, 159 TRUNC$                                1, 164
RESTORE                            53,159
RETURN                             43,159 user defined graphics                    89
[RETURN] key               5, 21, 29,159 UDG                                  89, 164
RND                                52,160 UNTIL                               54, 165
ROLL                               80,159 USR                                113, 165
ROM                               18, 160 USR$                                   113
RUN                          22, 32, 160
SAVE                19, 22, 25, 115, 160 VAL                                   58, 165
SCART socket                      11, 104 variables                        38,60, 165
SCREEN                            78, 161 VERIFY                  19, 22, 26, 115, 165
SCREEN$                               161
screen modes                       67, 69 'welcome scieen'                          5
SCROLL                           80, 161 WHILE                                55, 166
scroll?                            33, 79 WINDOW                          79, 80, 166
semi-colons                        35,168
SGN                               46, 162 x-axis y-axis                         46,77
[SHIFT] key                  13, 85, 162 x-y coordinates                      77, 166
SIN                               47, 162




                                                                                         184
185
186
                    Sam’s User Guide Front & Back Covers


             This User Guide was OCRed with Textbridge Pro 11
           & MS Word 2003. The PDF document was compiled with
                        JAWs Creator pdf version 6.3
                  by Steve Parry-Thomas 10 December 2004

                       For SAM Coupé uses everywhere.

            SAM Users Manual PDF version 1 – 10 December 2004

[ Version number may change as errors and text formatting are corrected There
is bound to an error or two, I’ve over looked or some text formatting that’s been
                               left for another day ]




                                                                             187
